
=== PAGE 1 ===
^/- a ^-'-
C7Vy,5
NASA Technical Memorandum 106093
AIAA-93-1152
Contributions of Microgravity Test
Results to the Design of Spacecraft
Fire Safety Systems
Robert Friedman
National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Lewis Research Center
Cleveland, Ohio
and
David L. Urban
Sverdrup Technology, Inc.
Lewis Research Center Group
Brook Park, Ohio
Prepared for the
AHS/ASEE Second Aerospace Design Conference
sponsored by the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
Irvine, California, February 16-19, 1993
NfGA

=== PAGE 2 ===
CONTRIBUTIONS OF MICROGRAVITY TEST RESULTS TO THE
DESIGN OF SPACECRAFT FIRE-SAFETY SYSTEMS
Robert Friedman 
David L. Urban
National Aeronautics and Space Administration 
Sverdrup Technology, Inc.
Lewis Research Center 
Lewis Research Center Group
Cleveland, Ohio 44135 
Brook Park, Ohio 44142
SUMMARY
Experiments conducted in spacecraft and drop
towers show that thin-sheet materials have reduced
flammability ranges and flame-spread rates under
quiescent low-gravity environments (microgravity)
compared to normal gravity. Furthermore, low-
gravity flames may be suppressed more easily by
atmospheric dilution or decreasing atmospheric
total pressure than their normal-gravity counter-
parts. The addition of a ventilating air flow to the
low-gravity flame zone, however, can greatly
enhance the flammability range and flame spread.
These results, along with observations of flame and
smoke characteristics useful for microgravity fire-
detection "signatures", promise to be of considerable
value to spacecraft fire-safety designs. The paper
summarizes the fire detection and suppression
techniques proposed for the Space Station Freedom
and discusses both the application of low-gravity
combustion knowledge to improve fire protection
and the critical needs for further research.
INTRODUCTION
In the confined quarters of orbiting spacecraft,
fire is a greatly feared hazard. Thus, fire preven-
tion is strongly emphasized in human-crew space
flight, and potentially flammable materials and
ignition sources are strictly limited and controlled
(ref. 1). Despite these measures, at least three
minor fire-threatening incidents involving electrical
short circuits or component overheating have been
reported on Shuttle missions (ref. 2). Momentary
Copyright © 1993 by the American Institute of Aeronautics
and Astronautics, Inc. No copyright is asserted in the
United States under Title 17, U.S. Code. The U.S. Govern-
ment has a royalty-free license to exercise all rights under
the copyright claimed herein for Governmental purposes.
All other rights are reserved by the copyright owner.
breakdowns of this nature can be tolerated, how-
ever, because, in the enclosed space of the Shuttle,
prompt action by the crew can prevent the initiation
and spread of fire and confine the damage to the
affected component.
Fire protection for the Shuttle includes smoke
detectors and extinguishers, whose designs are
adapted from those of conventional aircraft and
ground fire-protection systems. Shuttle fire-safety
requirements thus do not necessarily respond to the
special characteristics of low-gravity fires (ref. 3).
This recognized need will create opportunities for
applications of combustion-science knowledge to
spacecraft fire-safety designs and operations, par-
ticularly those for future improvements and for the
protection of the forthcoming Space Station Free-
dom (ref. 4). The direct application of scientific and
engineering data to spacecraft systems is always
complicated by severe constraints on mass, volume,
and power availability. Nevertheless, these data
offer a promise of fire-safety techniques that are
more responsive to possible fire incidents, more effi-
cient in operation, and less prone to false alarms.
It is the purpose of this paper, therefore, to
present microgravity research data on material
flammability, fire characteristics, flame spread, and
extinguishment in the space environment. The
paper will also review the proposed fire-safety
strategies, designs, and operations for the Space
Station Freedom. The discussion will suggest
potential applications of the data and identify
unresolved fire-safety design issues and the
research required for their resolution.
1

=== PAGE 3 ===
COMBUSTION IN MICROGRAVITY
Normal-gravity combustion is strongly affected by
the buoyant upward flow of hot, low-density com-
bustion products and the entrainment of fresh air it
induces. This natural-convective motion enhances
mass and heat transfer to replenish the oxygen
supply, remove the combustion products, and trans-
port energy into and away from the flame zone. In
the low-gravity (microgravity) environment of orbit-
ing spacecraft, natural convection is greatly
reduced, if not negligible. The assumption of a non-
convective, "zero-gravity" environment is a great
convenience to many fundamental combustion the-
ories, because the omission of the gravitational force
aids in the study of the effects of certain processes
— for example, diffusion, conduction, radiation, and
thermocapillarity — that are often overwhelmed by
the buoyant flows promoted by normal gravity.
With respect to spacecraft fire safety, it is impor-
tant to recognize that the near-absence of natural
convection will affect not only the flame spread and
flammability of fuels in low gravity but also the
characteristics of the flame itself. These flame and
combustion-product properties determine fire "sig-
natures" for early-warning detection, as well as the
response to extinguishment and fire controls.
While analytical models provide valuable insights
into the nature of microgravity fires, experimental
data that verify the model predictions are essential.
The opportunities to conduct microgravity-combus-
tion experiments on space missions have been
infrequent. Instead, most low-gravity combustion
research must be performed in ground-based, free-
fall facilities, such as drop towers or aircraft flying
parabolic trajectories (ref. 5).
MICROGRAVITY COMBUSTION-SCIENCE
RESEARCH RESULTS
Material Flammability in Low Gravity
Skylab test results. The first quantitative experi-
ments on fires under low gravity and reasonable
time durations were the 1974 material-flammability
Aluminized mylar. 0.008-mm thick
Neoprene coated nylon: 0.15-mm thick
Nylon: 3.1-mm thick
Polyurethane foam: 6.2-mm thick
L 
i lili^ 
I 
l 
l 
s Illi^ 
l 
i 
l 
t lili^ 
I
.2 
.5 1 
2 
5 
10 
20 
50 100 200
Flame-spread rate, mm/s
Figure i.—Flame-spread rates for spacecraft materials, from
Skylab zero-gravity flammability tests under an atmosphere
of 65-vol. % 0 2 in N2 at 36-kPa total pressure. Shaded bars
are microgravity rates; open extensions are corresponding
normal-gravity rates.
tests conducted on Skylab (the first U.S. space sta-
tion), reported by Mmzey (ref. 6). Representative
spacecraft materials, including aluminized Mylar,
Nylon, neoprene-coated Nylon, polyurethane foam,
and paper were ignited in the Skylab atmosphere of
65 Vol% 02 in N2 at 36-kPa total pressure. The
flame-spread rate of the burning materials was
calculated by comparison of the flame-front position
from successive motion-picture frames. Fig. 1 sum-
marizes the flame-spread results for four of the
materials. The normal-gravity reference data were
taken under differing flame-spread orientations of
upward, downward, and 45° downward. Hence,
only qualitative conclusions are possible, but the
results with each material indicate that the micro-
gravity flame-spread rates are consistently less
than those in normal gravity by factors of the order
of 0.15 to 0.60.
In addition to the flame-spread data, the Skylab
experiments provided two observations of fire extin-
guishment that are still of interest for current
applications:
• Extinguishment by water is possible, provided
the application is controlled and adequate. If
insufficient water strikes a burning material, it
causes a flare-up that can scatter burning material.
2

=== PAGE 4 ===
• Extinguishment by vacuum is effective, and the
flame is extinguished when the available oxygen
decreases sufficiently. A significant side effect is
the flame intensification that develops temporarily
because of the induced air flow during the initial
moments of venting.
Solid Surface Combustion Experiment results.
Recent tests, in a project called the Solid Surface
Combustion Experiment (SSCE), have been con-
ducted on selected Shuttle missions, starting with
STS-41 in October 1990. The objective of the SSCE
is to determine the flame-spread rates, flame char-
acteristics, and heat-transfer rates of sheets of
practical materials in a sealed chamber under
several low-gravity atmospheric conditions (ref. 7).
Fig. 2 shows the trend of microgravity flame-spread
rates over thin paper sheets at three total pressures
for an atmosphere of 50% 0 2 in N2. The investiga-
tors attribute the increase in flame-spread rate with
total pressure primarily to an increase in flame
radiation to the fuel surface (ref. 8).
Drop-tower experiment results. To date, quanti-
tative data on microgravity flammability from drop-
tower tests are available only for thermally thin
fuels, that is, those which are essentially isothermal
in depth. This is due to the limited microgravity
time. It must be recognized, however, that practical
spacecraft materials are often thick.
Fig. 3 presents the results of drop-tower studies
on microgravity flammability of thin paper wipes
(refs. 9 and 10). Two fuel thicknesses were created
by single and double layers of the same paper-wipe
material. The single-thickness fuel is barely flam-
mable in air, with a limiting oxygen concentration
for flame spread (LOC) of 21 vol% 02; the double-
thickness fuel is non-flammable in air, with an LOC
of 26% 02. Corresponding values of the LOC for
both thicknesses under normal gravity (downward
burning) is at 16.5% 02.
The data of fig. 3 also indicate that, for initially
quiescent environments, normal-gravity flames
spread more rapidly than microgravity flames. The
induced buoyant flow is sufficient to introduce fresh
.6
EU
.5
a
T .4
d
E
LL
.3` 
1'
100 
150 
200
Total pressure, kPa (1 atm = 101 kPa)
Figure 2.—Effect of total pressure at 50% 02 on flame-spread
rates of thin paper. Data from solid surface combustion
experiment (SSCE).
Limiting oxygen
8
concentration 
Single 
q
Normal gravity, downward 
thickness
Microgravity, 
i 
O
6
i i 
single thickness
 
QV^
E
i i 
Microgravity, 
/ /q
Double thickness
Double
thickness
I I 
I 
/^
4
a
ik
E
ME:
2
Microgravity
Normal gravity
0 
20 
40 
60 
80 
100
Oxygen concentration in atmosphere, vol. %
Figure 3—Flame-spread rates for thin paper fuels (reference
single thickness of 0.076 mm) at 101-kPa pressure.
oxidizer to the flame zone, and the controlling
(limiting) mechanism for flame spread is gas-phase
conduction (ref. 11). Within experimental scatter,
however, the spread rate is independent of gravity
for oxygen concentrations greater than about 50 %.
At these levels, the oxygen supply for this fuel is
sufficient, and the microgravity flame spread is no
longer limited by oxygen transport but is controlled
by gas conduction as in normal gravity. The ratio
of single- to double-thickness flame-spread rates for
thermally thin fuels in normal gravity is typically
constant, inversely proportional to the thickness
(the lines appear to converge in the linear plot of
fig. 3). At low-oxygen-concentration microgravity
3

=== PAGE 5 ===
conditions, however, the inverse ratio of flame-
spread rates with thickness is greater; and this
ratio increases as the limiting oxygen concentration
is approached.
Velocity and Convective Effects
The material-flammability tests discussed in the
previous sections were conducted under quiescent
conditions, a state truly obtainable only in negli-
gible gravity, since normal-gravity buoyancy always
establishes an appreciable combustion-product flow.
The spacecraft environment, however, is likely to
induce some forced convection through the usual
ventilation and air circulation under almost all
operating conditions. Although this air flow is at a
very low velocity, it can have a substantial influ-
ence on microgravity flammability.
Fig. 4 shows drop-tower experimental data on the
effects of forced air flows on microgravity flamma-
bility and flame-spread rates. The fuels were single
thicknesses of paper wipes. Microgravity tests were
conducted with superimposed air flows of the order
of 5 to 6 cm/s both opposed to and in-line with
(cocurrent) the flame-spread direction (refs. 11 to
13). At low-oxygen-concentration atmospheres,
fig.4 shows that air flows in either direction
increase the microgravity flame-spread rates above
those for quiescent conditions. Reference curves for
downward burning (opposed flow) normal-gravity
and quiescent microgravity flame spread are also
included in the figure. The flammability range for
the microgravity flames with opposed air flow
extends to atmospheres with near 15 Vol%-02 con-
centrations, well below the LOC of 21% 0 2 observed
for the quiescent case. The cocurrent-flow flamma-
bility range appears to extend to even lower oxygen
concentrations (ref. 13). Unstable flame length
makes the cocurrent-flow flammability range deter-
mined in short-duration tests uncertain, however.
Flammability-range data for corresponding condi-
tions of cocurrent flow in normal gravity are not yet
available.
Flame Characteristics
The most likely fire situation in spacecraft is that
of ignition and combustion of solid surfaces, typified
O Microgravity,
5 cm/s cocurrent flow (A)
q Microgravity,
6 cm/s opposed flow (B)
2.4 
Normal gravity,
/
ntray
tigonownward
ref. (D)
2.0 
ygen
N 
ation 
Microgravity,
E 
AC 
Quiescent (C)
u 1.6 
iiii
1.2i
a.8
E 
.
I
i4
010 
20 
30 
40
Oxygen concentration in atmosphere, Vol. %
Figure 4.—Flame-spread rates for thin paper under micro-
gravity with air flow cocurrent and opposed to flame spread
at 101 kPa pressure.
by wire insulations or thin sheets of paper, cloth, or
plastics. Photographs from solid-surface flammabi-
lity tests have provided evidence that the micro-
gravity flame spreading over a thin surface appears
detached from the surface, forming two lobes, one
on either side of the pyrolyzing solid (refs. 3 and
11). The flame progresses uniformly without
flickering unless the flow is unsteady. With
increasing opposed-flow velocities or atmospheric-
oxygen concentrations, the microgravity flame
decreases in width and moves closer to the fuel
surface.
Recognition of the distinctive appearance of the
microgravity flame is necessary to establish alarm
sensitivities for flame and perhaps smoke detectors
in spacecraft.
Fire Suppression
The observations of the effects of extinguishment
by water or by venting to vacuum in the Skylab
experiment have been cited in an earlier section of
this paper. Other tests have simulated suppression
conditions on a small scale by drop-tower micro-
gravity-combustion experiments conducted with
substituted atmospheric diluents or with decreased
atmospheric total pressure.
4

=== PAGE 6 ===
Atmospheric dilution. Drop-tower combustion
tests of thin paper wipes were conducted under
atmospheres in which helium, argon, and carbon
dioxide were substituted for nitrogen (ref. 14).
Since each of these diluents has differing thermal
properties of conductivity and heat capacity, they
influence the flame-zone temperature and reaction
rates in varying ways. Fig. 5 presents data compar-
ing microgravity flammability and flame-spread
rates under carbon dioxide-oxygen atmospheres to
those under nitrogen-oxygen atmospheres (ref. 15).
Results show, first, that the substitution of carbon
dioxide as the atmospheric diluent for nitrogen
greatly diminishes the flammable range; the limit-
ing oxygen concentration for combustion is
increased from 21 vol% to near 35 %. Second, the
flame-spread rates at low oxygen concentrations are
lower for the carbon dioxide-diluent atmosphere
than for the nitrogen atmosphere.
In the experiments summarized by fig. 5, each
test condition was established by maintaining a
constant oxygen quantity equivalent to a 21-kPa
partial pressure (the normal sea-level value) and
adding diluent to achieve the desired oxygen con-
centration. The total pressure thus varies from
101 kPa at 21% 0 2 to 21 kPa at 100% 0 2. The
30%-02 condition (72-kPa total pressure) represents
the proposed atmosphere for the buildup stages of
the Space Station Freedom. The data show that, for
this atmosphere, the experimental flame-spread
rate is greater than that for a 21 %-02-in-N2 atmos-
phere (air) by a factor of about 1.9. On the other
hand, under a carbon dioxide-diluent atmosphere,
the Freedom oxygen concentration is outside of the
paper-fuel flammability limit and represents a non-
flammable (also non-life-supportive) atmosphere.
The application of the dilution results of fig. 5 to
predict spacecraft fire suppression by carbon dioxide
flooding must be treated with caution. The tests
determined whether flame spread can occur under
each prescribed atmosphere, not whether the atmos-
phere will extinguish an already established fire in
air. No tests were conducted with mixed diluents,
for example, 50% CO 2 and N2, to represent realistic
suppressant-flooding atmospheres.
Limiting oxygen
concentration
6
Nitrogen diluent
Carbon dioxide diluent 
A
E
L)
I 
I
6 
4
j 
j 
Nitrogen
i 
i di
I 
I 
Carbon dioxide
a
T 
2
^
E
0 
20 
40 
60 
80 
100
Oxygen concentration In atmosphere, vol. %
106 
53 
35 
26 
21
Total atmospheric pressure, kPa
Figure 5.—Effect of carbon dioxide substitution for nitrogen
diluent on microgravity flammability of thin paper fuels.
Atmospheres have 0 2 content fixed at 21 kPa for all cases.
Depressurization. Suggestions are frequently
made to investigate atmospheric venting to the
vacuum of space to extinguish a difficult fire in
spacecraft (ref. 4). Flammability and flame spread
depend to a large degree on the atmospheric oxygen
concentration, rather than on the oxygen quantity,
or partial pressure; and reduction of the total
pressure by venting does not alter the composition
of the residual atmosphere. Hence, fires can persist
as total pressure is lowered, until a condition is
reached where the mass transport, through natural
convection or other processes, is too low to replenish
the flame with oxygen. This may require venting to
near-vacuum final conditions.
No data are available on the effect of depressuri-
zation on flame suppression in microgravity, other
than the single small-scale test in Skylab, cited in
an earlier section of this paper (ref. 6). Some
related information, however, is available from
recent NASA drop-tower tests (J.L. Strom, unpub-
lished data). A series of experiments investigated
the flammability of thin cellulose-membrane fuels,
under successive atmospheric conditions of decreas-
ing initial total pressure, each identified as a
percentage of a reference total pressure, namely,
the Freedom atmosphere of 30% 0 2 at 72-kPa total
pressure. Results are summarized in fig. 6. Under
normal gravity, the flame-spread rate for successive
reduced-total-pressure conditions diminishes
5

=== PAGE 7 ===
slightly, and a pressure limit of flammability (PLF)
is noted at 13% of the original total pressure. For
microgravity, flame-spread rate is much more sensi-
tive to the reductions in total pressure, and the PLF
is at 78% of the original pressure. The greater sen-
sitivity of the flame to total-pressure reduction is
most likely due to the lack of natural-convective
mass transport of oxidizer in microgravity.
Although of qualitative significance, the tests
cited in fig. 6 do not simulate the suppression of
established flames by depressurization, nor do they
reproduce the dynamics of air flow induced by
depressurization. The observation of venting in
Skylab indicated that the depressurization-induced
flow causes a flame to flare up, and presumably
spread faster, before it succumbs to the reduced
total-pressure environment.
FIRE-SAFETY APPLICATIONS
TO SPACECRAFT
The Space Station Freedom
Fire-safety designs are actively in progress for the
protection of the Space Station Freedom. Freedom
will be an aggregation of self-sustaining inhabited
volumes and auxiliary platforms placed in a perma-
nent low-earth orbit. The space station provides the
opportunity for expansion of life-science studies,
microgravity science and technology, earth observa-
tions, space-probe launching, and satellite servicing.
The initial concern for fire safety is in the protec-
tion of the Man-Tended Configuration (MTC), the
minimum assembly of components necessary to sus-
tain human activities within the station (ref. 16).
Freedom will be occupied by the crew only during
the Shuttle-tended periods from the MTC until the
final configuration of the Permanently Manned
Capability. During this period, the module atmos-
phere will be 30 vol% 02 in N2 at a total pressure of
72 kPa to permit egress for space -suited extra-
vehicular activities, without the need for prebreath-
ing to avoid decompression sickness (ref. 17). The
enriched-oxygen atmosphere will be retained in the
modules during the untended periods between
assembly phases.
Pressure
1.2 
limit
I
I 
Normal gravity
N
o .8
Pressure
^ 
limit
a
a 
i
m 
I
E .2 
O
LL 
Microgravity
0 
20 
40 
60 
80 
100
Total pressure, % of original atmosphere
Figure 6.—Effect of total pressure reduction on flammability of
thin cellulose fuels. Original atmosphere (100%) is 30-vol. %
02 in N 2 at 72-kPa total pressure.
The major pressurized, inhabited component at
MTC is the laboratory module (fig. 7). In the
module, surrounding the central aisle space are
racks for payload, control, and storage. The four
sectors filling the spaces between the racks, running
the length of the module, called standoffs, are used
for interconnecting plumbing and wiring. The racks
with electrical power (essentially all), standoffs,
central core, and the longitudinal end-cone closures
will each have dedicated fire detection and suppres-
sion provisions.
Fire Prevention
The selection of materials for use in the habitable
volumes of spacecraft is based on a prescribed cri-
terion of non-flammability, specifically, flame-
spread resistance (ref. 18). Since acceptance testing
in low gravity is obviously not feasible, tests con-
ducted in conventional, normal-gravity environ-
ments must be interpreted to predict performance
in microgravity. For many years, this normal-
gravity acceptability had the assurance that flame-
spread rates were always lower in microgravity
than in normal gravity, an assumption supported by
the Skylab material-flammability experiment data
(fig. 1).
Because of the known enhancement of micro-
gravity flammability by ventilating flows, the safety
factor afforded by normal-gravity testing is now
suspect (ref. 1). In addition, there are other micro-
gray. -combustion phenomena that can influence
6

=== PAGE 8 ===
A7
Standoff,
typical of 4
Rack, typical of 4
in cross-section
(24 total) -7
Al
Section A - A
simplified
Figure 7.—Freedom laboratory module.
^- Laser
i
source,
/ 
sensors, in
electronics
Mousing
the flammability of materials, including the
increased likelihood of smoldering, the long-term
persistence of flammable aerosols, and fire spread
by radial expulsion of hot particles from melting
plastics (refs. 4 and 19). Even flammability rank-
ings of materials determined by comparative testing
in normal gravity may be reversed for microgravity
conditions (ref. 20). Furthermore, many necessary
spacecraft items (including paper, fabrics, and some
commercial components) cannot pass any fire-
spread acceptance test, and material-usage agree-
ments are necessary to prescribe the quantity
limitations and storage conditions of these
materials.
Fire Detection
Although fire prevention is emphasized in human-
crew spacecraft, one must assume some probability
of breakdowns and fire "incidents". Thus, the total
program of spacecraft fire protection includes the
responsive measures of fire detection, suppression,
and post-fire restoration.
Fig. 8 illustrates a mockup of the smoke detector
in development for the Space Station Freedom. The
detector is to be mounted in a duct installed in each
protected element, sampling the air flow generated
by an exhaust fan. The detector operates on the
principle of light scattering by aerosol particles. A
beam from a laser source in the upper housing is
directed through the light-path chamber and is
reflected by mirrors to a photodiode sensor in the
Mockup
of air duct
"^ 
- -- Beam
path
-^ 
— Reflecting
mirrors
Figure 8.—Model of photoelectric smoke detector for
Freedom (Allied Signal Aerospace design).
same upper housing. The sensor is off-axis; hence,
it receives radiation and responds with a signal only
if the direct beam is scattered by smoke particles in
the sampled stream. An additional in-line sensor is
available for monitoring a direct beam for built-in
testing.
Freedom requirements establish alarm-response
levels at minimum values of light obscuration and
particle density (ref. 4). The Freedom alarm sensi-
tivity is believed to be conservative, representing
barely visible smoke from smoldering or fires,
although the trade-off of adequate sensitivity to
false-alarm rejection is unresolved. These minima
7

=== PAGE 9 ===
are available only from normal-gravity experience,
of course (ref. 21). Preliminary data on smoke emis-
sions in microgravity indicate that soot-aggregate
size may be typically larger than those in normal
gravity. This is believed due to the increase in
residence time through elimination of buoyant flow
(D.W. Griffin, Sverdrup Technology, Inc., private
communication).
The Freedom fire protection will also include
flame detectors, located in each end cone. The
flame detectors will be radiation sensors, tuned to
ultraviolet and visible-light wavelength bands.
Minimum alarm-response sensitivities are estab-
lished, which are conservative values based on
airplane standards. No data are available yet on
typical microgravity flame emissions and spectral
qualities.
Fire Suppression
Fig. 9 is a schematic representation of the pro-
posed carbon dioxide suppression system for Free-
dom. Each of two standoff-mounted tanks contain
2.7 kg of agent; and either tank can release agent in
sufficient quantity to flood any protected zone, to a
concentration of 50% CO 21 through perforated distri-
butor tubes. During untended periods, the fixed
suppression system will release agent either upon
a ground signal or a confirmed fire alarm from the
space station.
The Freedom modules will also have two portable
carbon dioxide fire extinguishers, accessible at each
end-cone location. The portable fire extinguishers
will each have the same agent capacity as the fixed
storage tanks. The combination of fixed and
portable extinguishing systems provides four inde-
pendent opportunities for fire fighting during crew-
tended periods. Each protected element will have
a fire-detection and suppression panel (FDS) (shown
in fig. 9), which has a port to accommodate the noz-
zle of the fire extinguisher for access to the interior
of the enclosed volume.
Eventually, microgravity-combustion test results
will contribute to the refinement of fire suppression
in Freedom. There are already at least three con-
cerns that can benefit from further research,
Duplicate
CO 2 
Standoff
tankslyTypical zone to 
Other
I 
^ 
be protected 
zones
Distributor
tube —
FDS
panel
Release
valve, typ.J
Figure 9—Schematic of carbon dioxide suppression system
proposed for Freedom.
namely, extinguishment efficiency in microgravity,
toxic leakage of excess agent, and reignition of fires.
First, the response of the microgravity fire to the
chemical or physical properties of the agent influ-
ences the efficiency and consequent minimum quan-
tity of suppressant, in comparison to that required
under normal gravity. A particular problem is in
suppressing smoldering, or non-flaming combustion,
which is believed to have some probability of occur-
rence in foam and other construction materials in
spacecraft (ref. 1). Smoldering fires can be difficult
to detect and difficult to access for suppression, and
they threaten to generate toxic and corrosive by-
products even if the smoldering fire never pro-
gresses into flaming.
A second concern is the toxic properties of the
carbon dioxide agent in the module atmosphere.
The requirement of flooding to a concentration of
50% CO2 will overpressurize an affected element,
requiring venting and some unavoidable leakage
into the module that can easily exceed the allowable
concentration limits of the atmosphere. Nontoxic
alternatives, such as nitrogen or water, have been
suggested; but all agents have recognized draw-
backs in their practical application to spacecraft
(ref. 4). The difficulty of dispensing liquid water in
microgravity was one observation of the Skylab
experiments (noted in an earlier section of this
paper).
8

=== PAGE 10 ===
A third concern is the possibility of reignition
after apparent extinguishment. Since heat transfer
by natural convection in low gravity is negligible,
fire-heated surfaces cool slowly. Premature cessa-
tion of agent application or attempts to cool with
forced air flow may instead provide fresh oxidizer to
the fire-heated surface to re-establish the fire,
particularly in untended periods when the affected
zone cannot be observed.
Post-Fire Restoration
In contrast to the Shuttle, where cleanup after
minor incidents or fires can be accomplished on the
ground after a mission is terminated, post-fire
cleanup and restoration activities for Freedom must
be conducted in orbit. There is not only the imme-
diate problem of removal of atmospheric products
and repair of component damage but also the long-
term problem of recognizing and alleviating toxicity
and corrosion from contamination that may be evi-
dent only after periods of days or longer after a fire.
For atmospheric restoration after any but minor
fire situations, the removal of smoke aerosols, toxic
combustion products, and excess carbon dioxide
agent is far beyond the filtering and revitalization
capacity of the Freedom Environmental Control and
Life Support System. At least two cleanup
approaches are under consideration. One concept is
a permanent self-contained unit with filtering and
adsorption beds maintained on-board and sized for
emergency use after a fire (ref. 22). Mass, volume,
and power limitations hamper the development of
this system. A much simpler concept is that of
venting the affected element to the vacuum of space
using the existing suppressant-delivery system with
its relief valve and vent. Engineering problems to
be addressed in this design concept are those of
dealing with orifice clogging from soot and smoke
particles and release- or vent-valve damage from
hot gas flow. Controlled-flow venting of individual
elements for atmospheric cleanup is not to be con-
fused with the rapid, large-scale module venting
suggested for emergency fire suppression. The
latter procedure has the undesirable feature, al-
ready noted in this paper, of temporary flame
enhancement by induced flow.
Long-term corrosion of electronic and other com-
ponents from post-fire residues is also recognized as
a problem, but preventive or restorative approaches
are not yet developed.
CRITICAL ISSUES FOR SPACECRAFT
FIRE PROTECTION
Ideally, spacecraft fire protection must not com-
promise safety nor, at the same time, impede the
full utilization of Freedom. Fire-protection designs,
furthermore, are limited by space station require-
ments that control component mass, volume, and
power and maintain strict quality-control standards.
Nevertheless, the application of fundamental com-
bustion-science knowledge will promote improved
fire-safety efficiency and assurance. There are
several design and operational issues in spacecraft
fire safety can benefit from these research applica-
tions in the near future.
• The increased flammability of materials under
the 30 vol%-OZ, 72-kPa total-pressure atmosphere
for the assembly stages of the Space Station Free-
dom must be recognized. The reduced total pres-
sure may decrease the flame-spread rate, but the
higher oxygen concentration increases the rate to a
much higher degree. Data from small-scale micro-
gravity experiments indicate that flame-spread
rates in Freedom atmospheres are greater by about
a factor of two compared to those under air. Obvi-
ously, for the Freedom atmosphere, the number of
acceptable materials will decrease; and the number
of necessary waivered materials will increase.
• Data from small-scale microgravity experiments
indicate that flammability criteria must recognize,
in addition, the enhanced flammability of represen-
tative materials under microgravity with imposed
ventilation flows. Eventually, some means must be
devised to interpret the extensive databank of
acceptable materials established by normal-gravity
testing in terms of flammability in microgravity
with representative ventilation.
• Signature and alarm levels appropriate to the
recognition of microgravity fire incidents must be
9

=== PAGE 11 ===
established, with a balance of high sensitivity to
false-alarm rejection. Appropriate small-scale
experiments on flame and emission characteristics
are being initiated, but no quantitative data appli-
cable to microgravity fire signatures are yet avail-
able. Qualitative observations indicate that these
signatures can be considerably different from their
normal-gravity counterparts.
• Minimum flooding concentrations, maximum
release times, minimum suppressant-retention
times, and failure-tolerant redundancies for fire-
suppression systems must be determined. Data
from small-scale microgravity experiments indicate
that flame suppression may be more effective in low
gravity, suggesting design economies. Confidence in
applying this information awaits full-scale testing
at representative spacecraft conditions, however.
CONCLUDING REMARKS
Experience has demonstrated that present fire
protection of Shuttle is adequate, but future mis-
sions, particularly those of the Space Station Free-
dom, demand improved technologies. Fire-safety
concepts can benefit greatly from the growing know-
ledge of low-gravity (microgravity) combustion
science. Applications of this knowledge promise to
help meet goals of minimum risk of fire loss, mini-
mum interference with spacecraft operations, and
minimum mass and power consumption. Examples
of these applications include 1) material selection
determined by predicted flammability assessments
for ventilated microgravity environments, 2) single-
failure-tolerant fire-detection systems with
appropriate set points based on demonstrated char-
acteristics of microgravity fires and emissions,
3) extinguishing agents selected for maximum effec-
tiveness based on applications of microgravity sup-
pression data, and 4) emergency, high-capacity
environmental controls for post-fire cleanup and
rehabilitation in orbit.
REFERENCES
1. Rodney, G.A.: Critical Safety Assurance Fac-
tors for Manned Spacecraft — A Fire Safety Pers-
pective. IAF Paper 90-555, Nov. 1989.
2. Limero, T.; James, J.; Cromer, R.; and
Beck, S.: A Combustion Products Analyzer for Con-
tingency Use During Thermodegradation Events in
Spacecraft. SAE Tech. Paper 911479, July 1991.
3. Friedman, R.; and Olson, S.L.: Fire Safety
Applications for Spacecraft, in Aircraft Fire Safety,
AGARD Conf. Pub]. No. 467, Oct. 1989, pp. 15-1 to
15-15.
4.Friedman, R.; Sacksteder, KR.; and Urban, D.:
Risks, Designs, and Research for Fire Safety in
Spacecraft. NASA TM 105317, Nov. 1991.
5. Lekan, J.: Microgravity Research in NASA
Ground Based Facilities. AIAA Paper 89-0236,
Jan. 1989.
6. Kimzey, J.H.: Skylab Experiment M479 Zero
Gravity Flammability, in Skylab Results, Proe.
Third Space Processing Symp., Vol. 1, NASA MSFC
M-74-5 (NASA TM X-80252), Jan. 1974,
pp. 115-130.
7. Vento, D.; Zavesky, R.; Sacksteder, K; and
Altenkirch, R.: The Solid Surface Combustion Space
Shuttle Experiment Hardware Description and
Ground-Based Test Results. AIAA Paper 89-0503,
Jan. 1989.
8. Bullard, D.B.; Tang, L.; Altenkirch, R.A.; and
Bhattacharjee, S.: Unsteady Flame Spread Over
Solid Fuels in Microgravity. Paper presented at
Comm. on Space Res., World Space Congr., Wash-
ington, Sept. 1992.
9. Olson, S.L.: The Effect of Microgravity on
Flame Spread Over a Thin Fuel. NASA
TM 100195, Dec. 1987.
10. Olson, S.L.; Ferkul, P.V.; and Tien, J.S.:
Near-Limit Flame Spread Over a Thin Solid Fuel in
Microgravity. Twenty-Second Symposium (Interna-
tional) on Combustion, The Combustion Inst.,
Pittsburgh, 1989, pp. 1213-1222.
10

=== PAGE 12 ===
11. Olson, S.L.: Mechanisms of Microgravity
Flame Spread Over a Thin Solid Fuel: Oxygen and
Opposed Flow Effects. Comb. Sci. and Tech.,
vol. 76, 1991, pp. 233-249.
12. Ferkul, P.V.: An Experimental Study of
Opposed Flow Diffusion Flame Extinction Over a
Thin Fuel in Microgravity. NASA CR 182185,
Feb. 1989.
13. Grayson, G.; Sacksteder, K.R.; and T'ien, J.S.:
An Experimental Study of Low Speed Concurrent-
Flow Flame Spread over a Thin Fuel. Paper pre-
sented at the Combustion Inst., Central States Sec.,
Spring Tech. Mtg., April 1991.
14. Olson, S.L.; Stouffer, S.C.; and Grady, T.:
Diluent Effects on Quiescent Microgravity Flame
Spread over a Thin Solid Fuel. Paper presented at
the Combustion Inst., Eastern States Sec., Fall
Tech. Mtg., Oct.-Nov. 1989.
15. Friedman, R.; and Dietrich, D.L.: Fire Sup-
pression in Human-Crew Spacecraft. Jour. Applied
Fire Science, vol. 1, no. 3, 1990-1991, pp. 243-258.
16. Sendral, E.D.E.: Overview and Status of Space
Station Freedom Modules. AIAA Paper 92-1307,
March 1992.
17. McCarthy, KB.; and Green, J.A.: The Effect of
Reduced Cabin Pressure on the Crew and Life
Support System. SAE Tech. Paper 911331,
July 1991.
18. NASA Office of Safety and Mission Quality:
Flammability, Odor, Offgassing, and Compatibility
Requirements and Test Procedures for Materials in
Environments That Support Combustion. NASA
NHB 8060.1C, April 1991.
19. Olson, S.L.; and Sotos, R.G.: Combustion of
Velcro in Low Gravity. NASA TM 88970,
March 1987.
20. T'ien, J.S.: The Possibility of Reversal of
Material Flammability Ranking from Normal Gra-
vity to Microgravity. Comb. and Flame, vol. 80,
1990, pp. 355-357.
21. Thomas, E.C.: Microgravity Fire Detection
Problems — Fact of Fiction? SAE Tech. Paper
901215, July 1990.
22. Sribnik, F.; Birbara, P.J.; Faszcza, J.J.; and
Nalette, T.A.: Smoke and Contaminant Removal
System for Space Station. SAE Tech. Paper
901391, July 1990.
11

=== PAGE 13 ===
Form Approved
REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE
OMB No. 0704-0188
Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources,
gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. 
Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this
collection of information, including suggestions for reducing this burden, to Washington Headquarters Services, Directorate for information Operations and Reports, 1215 Jefferson
Davis Highway, Suite 1204, Arlington, VA 
22202-4302, and to the Office of Management and Budget, Paperwork Reduction Project (0704-0188), Washington, DC 
20503.
1. AGENCY USE ONLY (Leave blank)
2. REPORT DATE
3- REPORT TYPE AND DATES COVERED
March 1993
Technical Memorandum
4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE
5. FUNDING NUMBERS
Contributions of Microgravity Test Results to the Design
of Spacecraft Fire Safety Systems
WU-323-53- 62
6. AUTHOR(S)
Robert Friedman and David L. Urban
7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES)
8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION
REPORT NUMBER
National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Lewis Research Center
E-7445
Cleveland, Ohio 44135-3191
9. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAMES(S) AND ADDRESS(ES)
10. SPONSORING/MONITORING
AGENCY REPORT NUMBER
National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Washington, D.C. 20546-0001
A TM— 106093
AIA
11. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES
Prepared for the AHS/ASEE Second Aerospace Design Conference sponsored by the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics,
Irvine, California, February 16 — 19, 1993. Robert Friedman, NASA Lewis Research Center and David L. Urban, Sverdrup Technology, Inc.,
Lewis Research Center Group, 2001 Aerospace Parkway, Brook Park, Ohio 44142. Responsible person, Robert Friedman, (216) 433-5697.
12a- DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
12b. DISTRIBUTION CODE
Unclassified - Unlimited
Subject Category 18
13. ABSTRACT (Maximum 200 words)
Experiments conducted in spacecraft and drop towers show that thin-sheet materials have reduced flammability
ranges and flame-spread rates under quiescent low-gravity environments (microgravity) compared to normal gravity.
Furthermore, low-gravity flames may be suppressed more easily by atmospheric dilution or decreasing atmospheric
total pressure than their normal-gravity counterparts. The addition of a ventilating air flow to the low-gravity flame
zone, however, can greatly enhance the flammability range and flame spread. These results, along with observations
of flame and smoke characteristics useful for microgravity fire-detection "signatures", promise to be of considerable
value to spacecraft fire-safety designs. The paper summarizes the fire detection and suppression techniques proposed
for the Space Station Freedom and discusses both the application of low-gravity combustion knowledge to improve
fire protection and the critical needs for further research.
14. SUBJECT TERMS
15. NUMBER OF PAGES
Aerospace safety; Combustion products; Extinguishing; Flammability; Fires; Reduced
).:
16. PRICE CODE
A03
gravity; Smoke detectors; Space stations; Weightlessness
17. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION
18. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION
19. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION
20. LIMITATION OF ABSTRACT
OF REPORT
OF THIS PAGE
OF ABSTRACT
Unclassified
Unclassified
Unclassified
NSN 7540-01-280-5500 
Standard Form 298 (Rev. 2-89)
Prescribed by ANSI Std. Z39-18
298-102

=== PAGE 14 ===
National Aeronautics and 
FOURTH CLASS MAIL
Space Administration
Lewis Research Center 
ADDRESS CORRECTION REQUESTED
Cleveland, Ohio 44135
01 iclal Business
Penalty for Private Use $300
IVASA
