
=== PAGE 1 ===
 
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 
1
Evaluating Material Flammability in Microgravity and Martian Gravity  
Compared to the NASA Standard Normal Gravity Test 
 
S.L. Olson*1 and P.V. Ferkul2 
 
1NASA Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, OH 44135 
2National Center for Space Exploration Research, Cleveland, OH 44135  
 
 
 
Drop tower tests are conducted at Martian gravity to determine the flammability of three 
materials compared to previous tests in other normal gravity and reduced gravity 
environments.  The comparison is made with consideration of a modified NASA standard 
test protocol.  Material flammability limits in the different gravity and flow environments 
are tabulated to determine the factor of safety associated with normal gravity flammability 
screening.  Previous testing at microgravity and Lunar gravity indicated that some 
materials burned to lower oxygen concentrations in low gravity than in normal gravity, 
although the low g extinction limit criteria are not the same as 1g due to time constraints in 
drop testing.  Similarly, the data presented in this paper for Martian gravity suggest that 
there is a gravity level below Earth’s at which materials burn more readily than on Earth.  
If proven for more materials, this may indicate the need to include a factor of safety on 1g 
flammability limits. 
 
I. Introduction 
urrently, NASA STD 6001 Test 1 is the major method used to assess flammability of materials intended for use 
in habitable environments of U.S. spacecraft.1 The method is a pass/fail upward flame propagation test 
conducted in the most severe flaming combustion environment (oxygen concentration, pressure) expected in the 
spacecraft (e.g. currently 30% oxygen at 10.2 psia which is the pre-breath environment on the ISS for spacewalks). 
Materials that do not self-extinguish after six inches of burning must undergo other special considerations and/or 
tests if they are to be used on spacecraft.  To better understand the actual spacecraft flammability limits, a modified 
Test 1 protocol has been evaluated with 3 materials in Martian gravity (0.38 g Earth) and compared to earlier related 
tests at 1g, Lunar g, and microgravity with forced convection.  This modified Test 1 protocol relies on performing 
multiple tests in 1-g (refs. 2-4).  For reduced gravity tests, the protocol is modified slightly (as described later) 
because of the number of drop tower tests which would be required. 
 
This protocol, rather than qualifying materials as pass/fail in the worst-expected environments, measures the 
actual upward flammability limit (akin to the Limiting Oxygen Index (LOI)) for the material so that a more accurate 
assessment of the margin of safety of the material in the real use environment can be made. In broader application, 
the modified Test 1 protocol would provide the option of selecting better or best materials based on the best margin 
of safety relative to the use environment, as opposed to what would be considered just “passing” from a 
flammability point of view.  
For future space missions, it is often desirable to reduce cabin pressure while maintaining oxygen partial 
pressure.5 Atmospheres are chosen based on several considerations including: material flammability, decompression 
sickness, hypoxia, and efficient crew transfers and excursions.  Keeping oxygen partial pressure constant while 
reducing total pressure has the effect of increasing the concentration of oxygen which in turn leads to increased 
flammability of materials. 
One of the major lessons learned from the Apollo 1 fire is that it is impossible to eliminate all ignition sources,6 
so fire prevention is achieved in spacecraft through material controls near potential ignition sources and the use of 
fire resistant materials. After Skylab, the Space Shuttle and the International Space Station (ISS) have operated at 
normal sea-level conditions (air, 21% oxygen and 79% nitrogen by volume at 14.7 psia total pressure) except for 
brief pre-EVA activities when oxygen levels are increased for a short period of time to 30% oxygen while the total 
C

=== PAGE 2 ===
 
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 
2
pressure is lowered to 10.2 psia. Many of the materials which had been used in the Shuttle or which are currently 
used in ISS are therefore only tested and rated to 30% oxygen at 10.2 psia.  
 
 
 
In the modified procedure,2 the oxygen concentration in Test 1 is successively reduced to identify the Upward 
Limiting Oxygen Index (1g ULOI) and the Maximum Oxygen Concentration (1g MOC) that consistently results in 
self-extinguishment of the material. The 1g ULOI is defined as the oxygen concentration at which a material passes 
the NASA STD 6001 Test 1 burn length criterion approximately half the time. The 1g MOC is defined as the 
oxygen concentration where at least five samples passed the burning criterion (according to the NASA STD 6001 
Test 1 definition) and where at least one sample failed in the environment that contained 1 percent more oxygen by 
volume.  This is shown schematically for an arbitrary material in Fig. 1.  For reduced gravity tests, the definitions of 
MOC and ULOI are modified slightly (as described later) because of the number of drop tower tests which would be 
required. 
II. Experiment Description 
To better understand a material’s flammability limits at reduced gravity, we evaluate three materials in Martian-g 
using the centrifuge described below. These tests are combined with 1g tests performed at NASA’s White Sands 
Test Facility (WSFT), microgravity tests with forced convection, and Lunar-g tests at NASA’s Glenn Research 
Center.  
The centrifuge was developed for use in a drop tower environment. The apparatus is subject to the usual 
constraints on size and volume for the Zero Gravity Facility at the NASA Glenn Research Center.7 The centrifuge 
consists of a flat circular base (turntable) and the chamber dome. 
Most experiments examining fluid and gas flows require a chamber for containment and atmosphere, since the 
drop tower is evacuated before a drop.  The chamber was designed to maximize the rotation radius possible on the 
drop bus. The strength of the chamber was built to permit tests up to 2 atm absolute pressure. A photograph of the 
chamber is shown in Fig. 2.  More details are provided elsewhere.8 
The fuels used include Ultem® 1000, Nomex® HT90-40, and Mylar® G or Melinex® 515.   These three 
materials were evaluated for microgravity, Lunar, and Martian flammability limits to compare with the 1g ULOI and 
1g MOC.  
Ultem® 1000 (fire retarded polyetherimide (PEI)) in 10 mil thick film is inherently flame-retarding, with 
charring characteristics, a very low smoke signature, very low smoke toxicity, and a low heat-release rate.   
  
Figure 1. Near limit probability that a material will burn or not, with the ULOI and MOC indicated. 

=== PAGE 3 ===
 
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 
3
Nomex® HT90-40 is a 12 mil thick fire 
retarded aromatic nylon fabric which does not 
melt or drip as it burns. When exposed to a heat 
source, the Nomex fibers swell and seal the spaces 
between the fibers, stopping air movement 
through the fabric and thus inhibiting heat transfer 
through the fabric.  
Mylar® G is a 5 mil thick plastic film made 
from polyethylene terephthalate. It is not fire-
retarded, melts as it burns, and was selected 
primarily for its non-charring character. The 
WSTF comparison tests used Melinex® 515, a 
very similar Dupont Teijin film. 
The solid fuel sample was mounted within the 
chamber as shown schematically in Fig. 3. The 
fuel sheet is mounted parallel to the turntable and 
near the outer periphery. It is sandwiched between 
two 0.005”-thick mica rectangular frames (5 cm x 
15 cm opening) which are in turn sandwiched 
between 0.010”-thick stainless steel rectangular 
frames. The fuel is ignited with a hot wire at the 
furthest point from the center so that a concurrent-
flow flame spread geometry is established. 
The chamber is filled to the desired 
atmosphere. Prior to the drop, the chamber is 
rotated for at least five minutes to allow the 
interior gases to come up to speed (solid body rotation). To achieve Martian gravity levels, the rotation rate required 
is 30.8 RPM.  Martian g-level is achieved at the radial distance of the igniter. 
 
In order to maximize available drop time, the goal was to get the samples ignited right at or slightly before the 
drop. For the Ultem and Nomex samples, the igniter current was initiated 2.1 seconds before drop and was on for a 
  
Figure 3. Schematic of Zero-Gravity Centrifuge showing fuel location; buoyant flow is toward the 
center of the turntable. 
Rotation 
Chamber Dome 
Experiment Platform       
                (Turntable) 
Igniter 
Figure 2. Zero-Gravity Centrifuge. 
Drop Bus 
Chamber Dome 
Experiment Platform               
(Turntable) 
Pneumatic Lifters 

=== PAGE 4 ===
 
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 
4
total of 3.5 seconds. For the Mylar samples, ignition was easier to achieve. The igniter current was initiated 1 second 
before the drop and was on for a total of 2 seconds. The Mylar sample ignitions were assisted using a small strip of 
thin tissue paper (Kimwipes, 0.5-cm width) which helped provide a uniform energy deposition to this melting fuel. 
For all cases, the average igniter power was 58 watts. All the Martian-g cases used the same igniter wire. 
Experiments were then conducted to examine the maximum oxygen concentration at which three different 
materials burning in Martian gravity would self-extinguish. (Experiment materials and test conditions were chosen 
to match earlier tests performed at WSTF, described below.)  Slightly different than the 1-g definitions of MOC and 
ULOI, the MOC* for these tests was defined as the maximum oxygen concentration at which the flame was 
observed to self-extinguish during the drop time. The ULOI* criterion was minimum oxygen concentration where 
the flame survived the full drop time. Images of the ULOI* conditions for each are shown in Fig. 4. The Mylar 
flame appeared stable (as shown later in Fig. 5) but the Nomex and Ultem flames were becoming quite dim and 
shrinking at the end of the drop (less than 1 cm in length and getting smaller).  Since it is likely that these very weak 
flames might have extinguished given longer time in Martian g, the limits found are conservative.a  
 
The NASA WSTF tests were conducted using the STD-6001 Test 1 protocol except a hot wire igniter is used to 
ignite the samples instead of a chemical igniter, to better compare with the low gravity results. This is because the 
chemical igniter provides heat for 25 seconds, and the longest low gravity time is 5 seconds. In addition, the 
atmosphere of the test was modified to find the ULOI and MOC as described earlier.  
III. Results 
Materials flammability tests were conducted for three materials at Martian-g.  The results were compared to ULOI 
and MOC values in 1-g, Lunar-g, and 0g (with a concurrent flow of 30 cm/s, which is a reasonable maximum local 
spacecraft ventilation velocity9).  
Representative flame images are shown in fig. 5 for Mylar burning at the Martian-g ULOI* condition (18% O2 at 
10.2 psi).  The igniter can be seen glowing on the left side of the frame until ignition.  Igniter power is then turned 
off and the igniter cools.  The flame starts out as dim blue but then brightens to yellow and actually appears to 
stabilize.  While the flame does not span the 5-cm width of the sample, it survives for the duration of the drop test.  
When the oxygen is decreased in another test to 17%, the flame goes out. 
                                               
a The flames in these Martian-g centrifuge tests were relatively small compared to the sample size and spread 
only a short distance along the available fuel in the 5.18 sec-duration drop tower tests.  Since the local centrifugal 
acceleration level is proportional to radius from the center of rotation, this means that the flame stays in a region of 
approximately constant g-level (lunar g).  On the other hand, if the flame were to spread a significant way along the 
fuel, the local acceleration level experienced by the flame would change appreciably as it spread. 
 
Figure 4. Front view pictures of Martian gravity concurrent flames for three different fuels
samples at the ULOI just as the drop ends (t=5.18 s).  
Nomex HT90-40  
Mylar G  
Ultem 1000 (10 mil) 

=== PAGE 5 ===
 
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 
5
 
Figure 5.  Flame images for Mylar at the Martian-g ULOI*.  Images are shown at 10 Hz progressing left to 
right then top to bottom.  The last frame shows flame extinction caused by impact of the experiment. 
 
The limiting oxygen values (ULOI and MOC) for each fuel are summarized in Table I (includes earlier data from 
ref. 8). We reiterate that the definition of MOC* and ULOI* are slightly different in reduced gravity (compared to 
MOC and ULOI definitions in normal gravity) because of the number of drop tower tests which would be required.  
The near-limit flames are generally small and localized to the upstream edge of the material. We noticed that any 
distortion of the burned edge of the material, such as curling, swelling, or contracting, weakens the flame apparently 
by influencing the flow around the burned edge. Since oxygen transport is critical to low gravity flames, anything 
that reduces the free flow of oxygen past the sample will reduce the material’s flammability.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

=== PAGE 6 ===
 
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 
6
Table I: Limiting Oxygen Molar Concentrations and 
Oxygen Margin of Safety for Different Gravity Levels 
 
Fuel 
 
 
Mylar® G 
10.2 psia 
Ultem® 1000 
10.2 psia 
Nomex® HT90-40 
14.7 psia 
1g ULOI 
21.2 
23.5 
23.5 
1g MOC 
20.0 
23.0 
22.1 
Martian ULOI* 
18.0 
22.0 
19.9 
Martian MOC* 
17.0 
21.1 
19.0 
Lunar ULOI* 
15.6 
21.0 
21.0 
Lunar MOC* 
14.1 
19.9 
19.9 
0g* ULOI* 
17.0 
24.0 
23.0 
0g* MOC* 
16.0 
23.0 
22.0 
Martian ∆O2 % 
-3.1 
-1.7 
-3.35 
Lunar ∆O2 % 
-5.75 
-2.8 
-2.35 
0g ∆O2 % 
-4.1 
0.25 
-0.3 
 
From the limit data, we can evaluate the oxygen margin of safety of the material in low gravity relative to the 1g 
Test 1 data. The oxygen margin of safety, or ∆O2 %,  is defined here as the mean 0g limit or the Lunar limit minus 
the mean 1g limit as follows: 






+
−




+
=
∆
2
)
(
2
)
*
*
(
%
1
1
2
g
g
MOC
ULOI
MOC
ULOI
O
   
 
(1) 
In Eq. (1), the lowest %O2 at which the material burned in the drop test for the full test time was taken as the 0g 
Lunar-g, or Martian-g ULOI*; the maximum %O2 where the material extinguished during the drop test was taken as 
the 0g, Lunar-g, or Martian-g MOC*. It should be noted that the low g extinction limit criteria are not the same as 1g 
due to time constraints in drop testing. A positive ∆O2% means that the flame will burn in 1g at lower oxygen 
concentrations than in low gravity (Lunar or 0g). Conversely, a negative ∆O2% means that the flame will propagate 
in Lunar or 0g at a lower oxygen concentration than in 1g and as reflected by the negative margin of safety. Values 
of ∆O2% for both 0g and Lunar g (from ref. 8) are included in Table I. 

=== PAGE 7 ===
 
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 
7
 
As shown in Fig. 6 and Table I, the 1g flammability limits are generally not conservative for these materials as 
evidenced by the negative ∆O2%, by up to -5.75% oxygen. For low gravity concurrent (upward) flow conditions, the 
absence of or reduction of buoyancy reduces convective heat loss from the flame zone. As such, the flame doesn’t 
have to release as much heat as in 1g to provide the same amount of heat flux to the unburned fuel. Thus, it is not 
entirely surprising that the low gravity flammability limits are lower than the 1g flammability limits, which is the 
general trend. The evaluation of the magnitude of this ∆O2% for other materials is continuing for concurrent 
flammability limits, to be followed by evaluation of the limits for opposed flow. If proven for more materials, this 
may indicate the need to include a factor of safety on 1g flammability limits.  
Nomex and Ultem are charring fuels. Char layer formation is a known fire-retardant mechanism since it reduces 
the heat release rate of the material. For these charring materials, the oxygen margin of safety in 0g is very close to 
zero, indicating that any reduced charring for 0g may be offset by less heat release in the reduced convective 
environment. In Lunar gravity, the oxygen margin of safety for these charring fuels is ~ 2.5% lower than 1g. It may 
be that with adequate but not excessive convection, materials burn better, as predicted by flammability maps.10  
Mylar is a non-charring material. Just as for metals combustion11 the absence of gravitational-induced dripping 
keeps heated molten fuel in the flame zone rather than removing it, and the result is a significantly negative oxygen 
margin of safety (~4-5%) in Martian, Lunar, and 0g.  
In fig. 7, limiting oxygen concentration is plotted for Mylar as a function of gravity level.  There appears to be a 
range of g-levels within which a flame can survive.  This is similar to the forced convective flammability 
boundary10.  The two u-shaped curves are presumed to bound the flammability boundary of this material.  Fig. 7 
includes additional two data points at sub-lunar g-levels to probe the behavior at low flow speeds, including one test 
at a g-level equaling that on Pluto.  Tests were conducted using precision mixtures of gases (+/- 0.1% O2) but at 
Figure 6. Oxygen Margin of Safety for four different gravity levels.  The squares are normal gravity
data which by definition has zero oxygen margin of safety since it is the test standard upon which
materials are assessed.  Martian, lunar, and microgravity oxygen margins of safety are generally
negative by as much as -5.75% O2 in molar concentration.  The average 0g oxygen margin of safety
for these three materials  is -2.6% and the average Martian oxygen margin of safety is 2.7%. 
Nomex HT90-40  
Mylar G  
Ultem 1000 (10 mil) 

=== PAGE 8 ===
 
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 
8
increments of 1% O2.  Given the sparcity of points, the exact shapes of the curves are not known, nor are the 
absolute minimums.  However the curves indicated show the qualitative features.  
 
IV. Conclusions 
A series of drop tower tests has been completed to determine the upward flame spread oxygen concentration 
extinction limits of three materials at Martian buoyant flow gravity levels for comparison with upward normal 
gravity limits, Lunar gravity, and at microgravity (with forced convection). The limiting oxygen levels at Martian 
gravity were significantly lower than normal gravity (up to 5.75% O2 lower), and typically between the normal 
gravity and Lunar gravity values. However, it should be noted that the low-g extinction limit criteria are not the 
same as 1g due to time constraints in drop testing. This consistent trend of negative margins of safety on normal 
gravity flammability screening tests indicates that normal gravity material flammability screening tests may not be 
conservative and some materials tested to be safe for use in space may actually be flammable. If proven for more 
materials, this may indicate the need to include a factor of safety on 1g flammability limits.  
The limits are defined with consideration of a modified NASA STD-6001 Test 1 protocol.2 That modified 
protocol measures the actual upward flammability limit (akin to the Limiting Oxygen Index (LOI)) for the material 
so that a more accurate assessment of the margin of safety of the material in the real use space environment can be 
made rather than merely qualifying materials as pass/fail in the worst-expected environments. 
The centrifuge apparatus is a useful tool to achieve gravitational acceleration levels in a range not easily 
attainable in simple drop tower or aircraft experiments. Additional research projects could make use of the chamber 
for their own specific objectives. 
Figure 7. Limiting Oxygen Concentration as a function of g-level for Mylar.  For a given oxygen
concentration, there is range of g-levels which will permit the flame to be sustained. 
Nomex HT90-40  
Mylar G  
Ultem 1000 (10 mil) 

=== PAGE 9 ===
 
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 
9
Acknowledgments 
We are grateful for the support of the FPDS (Fire Protection, Detection, and Suppression) program at NASA 
Glenn Research Center under the direction of Gary Ruff and JSC’s Lunar Surface Systems project office. Dan Gotti 
of NCSER at NASA GRC was responsible for the mechanical design of the centrifuge chamber.  Eric Neumann and 
his staff at the NASA GRC Zero-Gravity Facility were instrumental in the successful conduct of this experiment.  
 
References 
1“Flammability, Odor, Offgassing, and Compatibility Requirements and Test Procedures for Materials in Environments that 
Support Combustion, NASA STD 6001, Test 1, Upward Flame Propagation,” formerly NHB 8060.1C, 1998. 
2Hirsch, D.B. and Beeson, H.D., “Improved Test Method to Determine Flammability of Aerospace Materials,” Halon Options 
Technical Working Conference, 2001. 
3Hirsch, D.B. and Beeson, H.D., “Test Method to Determine Flammability of Aerospace Materials,” Journal of Testing and 
Evaluation Vol. 30, Issue 2, 2002. 
4Hirsch, D.B., Williams, J.H., Harper, S.A., Beeson, H., and Pedley, M.D., “Oxygen Concentration Flammability Thresholds 
of Selected Aerospace Materials Considered for the Constellation Program,” Second IAASS Conference: Space Safety in a 
Global World, Chicago, 2007. 
5Campbell, P.D., “Recommendations for Exploration Spacecraft Internal Atmospheres: The Final Report of the NASA 
Exploration Atmospheres Working Group”, NASA JSC-63309, 2006. 
6Lewis, J.F., Barido, R.A., and Tuan, G., “Crew Exploration Vehicle Environmental Control and Life Support Fire Protection 
Approach,” International Conference on Environmental Systems, SAE 2007-01-3255, 2007. 
7Lekan, J., “Microgravity Research in NASA Ground-Based Facilities,” NASA TM 101397, NASA LeRC, also AIAA-89-
0236, 1989. 
8Ferkul, P.V. and Olson, S.L., “Zero-Gravity Centrifuge Used for the Evaluation of Material Flammability in Lunar Gravity,” 
Journal of Thermophysics and Heat Transfer, Vol. 25, No. 3 (2011). 
9Sauers, D.G., "The Effects of Forced Air Flow and Oxygen Concentration on Flammability, Smoke Density, and Pyrolytic 
Toxicity,” Journal of Fire and Flammability, Vol. 7, 1976, pp. 181-199. 
10T’ien, J.S., “Diffusion Flame Extinction at Small Stretch Rates: the Mechanism of Radiative Loss,” Combustion and Flame 
Vol. 65, No. 1, 1986, pp. 31-34. 
11Steinberg, T.A., Wilson, D.B., and Benz, F.J., “Microgravity  and Normal Gravity Combustion of Metals and Alloys in 
High Pressure Oxygen,” Flammability and Sensitivity of Materials in Oxygen-Enriched Atmospheres, Vol. 6, ASTM STP 1197, 
edited by D.D. Janoff and J.M. Stoltzfus, American Society for Testing and Materials, Philadelphia, 1993. 
 
