
=== PAGE 1 ===
45th International Conference on Environmental Systems 
ICES-2015-196 
12-16 July 2015, Bellevue, Washington 
Results from on-board CSA-CP and CDM Sensor Readings 
during the Burning and Suppression of Solids – II (BASS-II) 
Experiment in the Microgravity Science Glovebox (MSG) 
 
Sandra L. Olson1 
NASA Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, OH 44135 
Paul V. Ferkul2 
USRA, Cleveland, OH 44135 
Subrata Bhattacharjee3 and Fletcher J. Miller4 
San Diego State Univ., San Diego, CA, 92182 
Carlos Fernandez-Pello5 and Shmuel Link6, 
Univ. California – Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, 94720 
James S. T’ien7 
Case Western Reserve Univ., Cleveland, OH, 44106 
and 
Indrek Wichman 
Michigan State Univ.,  E. Lansing, MI 48824 
For the first time on ISS, BASS-II utilized MSG working volume dilution with gaseous 
nitrogen (N2).  We developed a perfectly stirred reactor model to determine the N2 flow time 
and flow rate to obtain the desired reduced oxygen concentration in the working volume for 
each test.   We calibrated the model with CSA-CP oxygen readings offset using the Mass 
Constituents Analyzer reading of the ISS ambient atmosphere data for that day.  This 
worked out extremely well for operations, and added a new vital variable, ambient oxygen 
level, to our test matrices.  The main variables tested in BASS-II were ambient oxygen 
concentration, ventilation flow velocity, and fuel type, thickness, and geometry. 
BASS-II also utilized the on-board CSA-CP for oxygen and carbon monoxide readings, 
and the CDM for carbon dioxide readings before and after each test.  Readings from these 
sensors allow us to evaluate the completeness of the combustion.    The oxygen and carbon 
dioxide readings before and after each test were analyzed and compared very well to 
stoichiometric ratios for a one step gas-phase reaction. The CO versus CO2 followed a linear 
trend for some datasets, but not for all the different geometries of fuel and flow tested. We 
calculated the heat release rates during each test from the oxygen consumption and burn 
times, using the constant 13.1 kJ of heat released per gram of oxygen consumed.  The results 
showed that the majority of the tests had heat release rates well below 100 Watts.   Lastly, 
the global equivalence ratio for the tests is estimated to be fuel rich: 1.3 on average using 
mass loss and oxygen consumption data. 
                                                          
1 Dr., Combustion Physics and Reacting Systems Branch, m.s. 77-5 
2 Dr., Universities Space Research Association, m.s. 110-3 
3 Professor, Mechanical Engineering, 5500 Campanile Drive 
4 Associate Professor, Mechanical Engineering, 5500 Campanile Drive 
5 Professor,  Mechanical Engineering, 6105A Etcheverry Hall, m.s. 1740 
6 Graduate Student,  Mechanical Engineering, 60A Hesse Hall 
7 Professor,  Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, Glennan 418 

=== PAGE 2 ===
 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
2
Nomenclature 
BASS-II = Burning and Suppression of Solids – II experiment in the MSG aboard ISS [1, 2] 
Cin 
= concentration of oxygen entering work volume, = 0 (pure nitrogen) 
Co 
= initial concentration of oxygen in the work volume 
Cout 
= concentration of oxygen exiting the work volume, = c(t), a CSTR property 
C(t) 
= concentration of oxygen in the work volume as a function of time 
CDM 
= Carbon Dioxide Monitor, sensor aboard ISS (CO2) [3] 
CSA-CP = Compound Specific Analyzer-Combustion Products, sensor aboard ISS (O2, CO, others) [4, 5] 
CSTR 
= Continuously Stirred Tank Reactor 
HRR 
= Heat Release Rate, Watts 
GMT 
= Greenwich Mean Time, standard time on ISS 
ISS 
= International Space Station 
LPM 
= Liters Per Minute 
MCA 
= Major Constituents Analyzer, a mass spectrometer based system that measures the 
 
   major atmospheric constituents on ISS, calibrated O2 reference [6, 7] 
MMA 
= methylmethacrylate, monomer of PMMA released during material pyrolysis 
MSG 
= Microgravity Science Glovebox, a facility aboard ISS [8] 
PMMA 
= polymethylmethacrylate, (acrylic) 
SMAC 
= Spacecraft Maximum Allowable Concentration 
V 
= volume of MSG working volume, 0.25 m3 
r 
 
 
= flow rate of gaseous N2, 0.0005 m3/min maximum, adjustable 
t 
 
 
= time, minutes 
Φglobal  
= global equivalence ratio, (Eq.(3) 
τ  
 
= residence time of the working volume, = V/r, minimum of 500 minutes 
I. Introduction 
HE Microgravity Science Glovebox 
(MSG) in the Destiny Lab of the 
International Space Station (ISS) provides a 
contained atmosphere in which we can 
conduct fire safety experiments [8].  The 
MSG has a set of filter banks that capture 
particulates and convert the CO (carbon 
monoxide) to CO2 (carbon dioxide) using an 
ambient temperature catalyst.  The Burning 
and Suppression –II (BASS-II) hardware is 
shown inside the MSG working volume in 
Figure 1.  The BASS-II hardware consists of 
a flow duct, still camera, video camera, video 
and power boxes, external control box and 
associated plumbing and mounting systems.  
The black anodized 7.6 cm x 7.6 cm x 17 cm 
rectangular flow duct with rounded corners 
was originally built to perform gas jet 
diffusion flame studies [9], and was adapted 
to accommodate solid samples for the BASS 
experiments.     
 
The flow was blown through the duct using a small variable speed fan.  In addition, up to two additional flow 
restrictors could be used at the fan inlet to increase the pressure drop and thus reduce the flow through the duct to 
the desired value for the test point.  With no restrictors, the maximum flow velocity was ~55 cm/s, and with two 
restrictors this was reduced to ~35 cm/s.  The flow then passed through a honeycomb flow straightener and an inlet 
screen to reduce swirl.  An omnidirectional spherical air velocity transducer (TSI™8 # 8475) was positioned 
between the honeycomb and the screen, and was used to measure the steady-state flow through the duct.  The air 
velocity transducer probe had a response time of approximately one minute.  
T 
Figure 1.  Microgravity Science Glovebox Facility (MSG) 
working volume aboard the International Space Station (ISS) , 
with the Suppression of Solids – II  (BASS-II) experiment
hardware installed. The working volume of the MSG was diluted
using ISS nitrogen gas.  The CSA-CP (O2 and CO) and CDM (CO2)
sensors were used to obtain before and after burn gas 
concentrations. 

=== PAGE 3 ===
 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
3
 
The test section was 17 cm long. Inside the test section was a nozzle for nitrogen flow, a moveable scale, and an 
Oriel™8 #71768 thermopile detector with a CaFl windows (spectral range of 0.13 to 11 microns) in the downstream 
top back corner of the duct.  The test section of the duct had two orthogonal windows; the top one was replaced for 
BASS to provide a mounting rail system for the solid samples.  The top window was used by a Nikon™8 D300 12.3 
megapixel digital color still camera with a 60 mm lens that provided 4320 x 2968 pixel images.  The duct exit 
contained a perforated copper plate followed by a brass screen to provide heat rejection and a cold surface for soot 
deposition.  The flow turned ninety degrees to exit the duct, which facilitated mixing of the hot combustion gases 
with the cool ambient air. 
  
The front window opened to provide access to the test section for sample and igniter change out.  The front window 
also had interlocks for the igniter and nitrogen flow in the lower downstream corner.  A Panasonic color video 
camera WV-CP654 (760 x 480 pixel array) with a turning mirror looked in the front window.  The video camera had 
a built-in digital overlay that displayed the nitrogen flow rate (cm3/min), fan voltage (10xV), air velocity transducer 
reading (cm/s), and the radiometer signal.  The fan voltage was calibrated with the air velocity transducer at the end 
of every operations day.  The radiometer signal was not calibrated, but provided a measure of the flame dynamics 
and steadiness.  The external control box had controls for the fan voltage, nitrogen flow rate, enable switches for the 
igniter and nitrogen flow, and a radiometer gain level setting.  
 
A number of sample geometries were used for BASS-II:  Cast PMMA (polymethylmethacrylate) samples were 
shaped as rods of various diameters (6.35 to 12.7 mm), thin to thick slabs (0.125 to 5 mm), or a section of  a 4 cm 
diameter sphere.   In addition, flat cotton-fiberglass fabric samples were also burned.  These samples could generally 
be mounted so that they could be burned in either the opposed or concurrent flow direction. The flat samples were 1 
cm or 2 cm wide.  The samples were manually ignited with a Kanthal™8 A-1 29 gauge hot-wire igniter with a 
nominal hot wire resistance of 0.8 to 1 ohms, powered by 3.5-3.8 amps when the astronaut manually pulled the 
deployment lever to move the igniter into position.   Samples were burned within the duct and the combustion 
products exited the duct and mixed with the gas in the work volume.    Example flame images are shown in Figure 2.  
Many samples are still on orbit, but 34 
samples were returned and evaluated for 
mass loss. 
 
To evaluate the levels of combustion 
products produced during microgravity 
fires, BASS-II requested the use of the on-
board sensors to measure the O2  (oxygen) 
depletion 
and 
the 
completeness 
of 
combustion (CO, CO2) for microgravity 
combustion 
tests 
under 
spacecraft 
ventilation flow rates to provide scientific 
data on the stoichiometry of the diffusion 
flame reactions and heat release rates.  The 
request was approved, and the data reported 
here is the first extensive data on the 
stoichiometry and toxicity of combustion 
products in microgravity.   
 
The O2, CO2, and CO measurements 
required two portable, battery powered 
instruments in the working volume during 
testing: CDM (Carbon Dioxide Monitor), 
and 
CSA-CP 
(Compound 
Specific 
Analyzer-Combustion Products) [3-5].  The 
oxygen sensor (CSA-CP) is not recalibrated 
                                                          
8 Mention of trade names or commercial products is for descriptive purposes only and does not constitute 
endorsement or recommendation for use by the U.S. Government. 
Figure 2.  Flame geometries tested in BASS-II.   Sample images 
from the different geometries, from top left to bottom right:  opposed 
thin slab, spherical section, opposed rod higher flow, flat fabric 
sample at higher flow, opposed thick slab,  concurrent rod,  opposed 
rod at low flow with open tip (similar to concurrent rod), flat fabric 
sample at low flow).  The forced flow is up in all images. 

=== PAGE 4 ===
 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
4
on orbit, so we also used the Major Constituents Analyzer (MCA) [6-7] data to determine the oxygen sensor offset 
on a daily basis.  The resolution of the oxygen sensor in the CSA-CP was 0.1% O2.  Oxygen concentrations in the 
MSG working volume were varied during the testing from ambient ISS oxygen levels (~ 21% O2) down to ~ 14% 
O2 for very near-limit flames. The CO sensor in the CSA-CP is zero calibrated every 60 days, with a range of 0-
1000 ppm and a resolution of 1 ppm.    The CO2 sensor was within its calibration window, and had a range of 0-5% 
and a resolution of 0.1% by volume of CO2.     The sensor data provided initial and final conditions for repeated tests 
in a sealed working volume, and allowed us to determine when the working volume needed to be purged.  The O2 
decreased during each burn and the CO and CO2 increased accordingly.   
 
Many of the BASS-II tests also required a diluted atmosphere, which typically took one to three hours to achieve  
by dilution of the MSG working volume using ISS nitrogen (from the hose connecting BASS-II duct to back wall of 
MSG in Figure 1).     The nitrogen was regulated with a small (< 0.5 liters per minute (LPM)) MKS™8 179A mass 
flow meter and entered the flow duct through a small nozzle just downstream of the fan.  The fan in the flow duct 
was turned to maximum (>100 LPM) during the nitrogen flow to mix and blow the gas into the working volume and 
circulate it continuously throughout the hours-long dilution.   
 
 
II. Validation of MSG Dilution - Continuously Stirred Tank Reactor (CSTR) Model 
To utilize the capabilities of MSG to reduce the oxygen in the working volume in a controlled manner, we 
developed a dilution model based on a Continuously Stirred Tank Reactor (CSTR) model.  In this model, the mixing 
in the working volume (via the BASS-II duct fan) is assumed to be ‘instantaneous’, so that the outflow ‘leak’ 
concentration from the MSG work volume to the ISS cabin is the perfectly mixed instantaneous concentration.  This 
perfect mixing approximation is valid as long as the residence time (V/r) is 5-10 times as long as the mixing time, 
which is easily the case for the 100 LPM flow rate during dilution (250 liters/100 LPM ~ 2.5 min mixing time).  For 
the MSG volume and N2 flow rates, the working volume residence time is V/r=500+ minutes, and the mixing time is 
certainly shorter than 50 minutes, so the assumption is valid.   The model assumes the work volume is at constant 
pressure and temperature, and constant volume.  Thus the leak rate out of the work volume is equal to the rate of N2 
supplied (r). 
 
The model is based on a mole balance on O2 as follows:  
 
The control volume is the working volume, with an input of nitrogen and a leak rate of well-mixed gas.  
 
Boundary and conditions: 
 
Cin = 0 (pure N2), 
 
Cout = c(t) (CSTR property),    
 
C(0) = Co  
 
 
The rate equation is given by
 
rc
rc
c
c
r
V
dt
dc
out
out
in






)
(
 
 
Eq.(1) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Integrating and applying initial conditions:  
 
 
 
 
)
exp(
)
(
t
V
r
C
t
c
o


  
 
 
 
 
      Eq.(2) 
 

=== PAGE 5 ===
 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
5
 Astronaut Chris Cassidy conducted a 
calibration test on the morning of GMT 
(Greenwich Mean Time) 2013-095 in the 
MSG using a CSA-CP sensor taking 
oxygen readings of the MSG working 
volume at intervals during the dilution.  
During dilution, the BASS duct fan was 
turned to maximum, and the working 
volume air circulation was deactivated.  
To validate the model, we used the 
following values in the model based 
upon the test conditions: 
MSG working volume [8] = 0.255 m3 
BASS-II hardware = ~0.005 m3 
Net volume V ~ 0.25 m3 
N2 flow rate in = 493 cm3/min 
      (0.000493 m3/min) 
Initial O2 concentration c(0) = Co 
CSA-CP sensor C(0)=20.9% O2 
ISS MCA = 21.48 % O2   [10] 
 
Figure 3 shows the calibration data 
compared to the model predictions for 
both the CSA-CP readings and corrected 
for the offset from the MCA.  The model 
agrees very well with CSA-CP readings 
directly and corrected for the offset to provide a calibrated oxygen level with time.   The curvature is minimal due to 
the slow rate of nitrogen flow into the large 
volume. 
 
This model was used for subsequent 
BASS-II 
operations 
to 
determine 
the 
nitrogen flow rate and flow time to achieve 
the desired test oxygen concentration based 
upon the initial oxygen concentration and 
operational crew time constraints.  It worked 
very well, and post-dilution CSA-CP 
readings agreed extremely well with the 
model predictions over a range of dilution 
rates, as shown in Figure 4.  The out of 
calibration CSA-CP readings were then 
corrected for the offset from the MCA 
readings for that day to provide a calibrated 
oxygen reading for each test. 
III. Combustion Products  
Sensor readings were taken before and 
after each BASS-II test.  The sensor data is 
used to measure the O2 depletion and the 
completeness of combustion (CO, CO2) for 
each microgravity combustion test under 
spacecraft ventilation flow rates. 
The oxygen depletion data is compared 
to the CO2 production for each BASS-II test 
that used PMMA as the fuel.   
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
0
60
120
180
240
300
360
420
MSG Working Volume Oxygen % by volume
Time, minutes
Fast dilution
Slow dilution
Avg dilution
CSA-CP sensor readings
 
Figure 4.  Dilution model compared to fast, slow and average 
dilution rates during BASS-II operations.    Data from three
BASS-II tests and CSTR model (Eq.2) results that show the range of 
dilution times and oxygen levels obtained.  The control of both flow 
rate and dilution time allowed us to work around the crew’s schedule 
while still obtaining the desired working volume oxygen 
concentration for the test. 
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Oxygen Concentration in the MSG work volume,
% by volume
Time, minutes
Model using CSA-CP initial O2
Model using MCA initial O2
CSA-CP readings
MCA -offset
 
Figure 3.  Model verification of the CSTR modeling the MSG 
dilution using the CSA-CP sensor oxygen readings.  Sensor data 
taken at intervals during the dilution show how the measurements 
agree with the model curve(Eq.5).  Data symbols are sized to ± 0.1% 
O2, the resolution of the sensor. Raw CSA-CP data  and corrected 
data for the MCA offset are shown with the model predictions using 
the initial reading as the starting value. 

=== PAGE 6 ===
 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
6
 
The PMMA stoichiometric equation is:   
 
C5H8O2 + 6 O2 > 5 CO2 + 4 H2O       Eq.(3) 
 
 
The data, taken over a wide range of initial 
oxygen concentrations, forced opposed or 
concurrent flow velocities, and using 
various sample geometries, is compared 
with this stoichiometric ratio (6O2 : 5 CO2) 
in Figure 5.  As shown, the data agrees very 
well with stoichiometric ratios, indicating 
that despite the varied test conditions, the 
vast majority of the oxygen consumed did 
indeed go into carbon dioxide. 
 
 
Other than unburned fuel (primarily 
MMA (methylmethacrylate) vapor), which 
does contain some oxygen as shown in Eq. 
6, the only other potential species with 
oxygen is carbon monoxide, which was also 
measured, as shown in Figure 6.  The 
concurrent rods produced on average 550 
ppm of CO for every 1% of CO2.  The 
opposed rods had a very non-linear 
response, which may be indicative of a flow 
effect.   
 
The longer the burn, the more CO2 was 
formed, and the nominal test procedure for 
most samples was to turn the flow down in 
increments.  At very low velocities, the tail 
region of the opposed flow flames opened 
up, which presumably allowed incomplete 
combustion products to escape the flame 
zone. 
 
Interestingly, 
the 
concurrent 
procedure was very similar, but the 
concurrent flame always had an open tail, 
allowing incomplete combustion products to 
exit throughout the burn.   The opposed 
thick slabs fall somewhere in between, 
producing on average 370 ppm of CO for 
every 1% of CO2.   
 
The one outlier point from Figure 5 at 
2.8% CO2 is not included on Figure 6 since 
the CO sensor was over-ranged for this test 
(> 1000 ppm), so we have no quantitative 
value for CO for this test.  During this test, 
the long burn of the relatively strong flame 
caused some overheat damage to the 
downstream lower corner of the front 
window in the area where a leak was 
occurring.  The leak was repaired and 
operations 
proceeded 
without 
further 
incident. 
-4.0
-3.5
-3.0
-2.5
-2.0
-1.5
-1.0
-0.5
0.0
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
O2 Change during test,  % by volume
CO2 change during test, % by volume
Opposed rods
Concurrent rods
Opposed thin slabs
Opposed thick slabs
Spherical section, stagnation
Stoichiometric ratio (-6/5)=-1.2
 
Figure 5.  Oxygen depletion and Carbon Dioxide production 
during BASS-II tests with PMMA fuel.   The data from different 
geometries, flows, and initial oxygen concentrations all agree with 
the expected stoichiometric trend (shown by the dashed line).    
Figure 6.  Carbon monoxide generated compared to Carbon 
Dioxide generated in each test.   The CO generated appears to be 
clustered by geometric and flow configurations.  The concurrent rod 
geometry produced the most CO per CO2, and the opposed rods 
showed a very non-linear trend of CO versus CO2 production.   Thick 
opposed flow slabs fell in between the two.  
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
0.00
0.50
1.00
1.50
2.00
CO change during test, PPM
CO2 change during test, % by volume
Opposed rods
Concurrent rods
Opposed thin slabs
Opposed thick slabs
Spherical section, stagnation

=== PAGE 7 ===
 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
7
 
Of interest to the combustion community 
is the ratio of CO to CO2, a measure of 
completeness of combustion, which is 
plotted in Figure 7 as a function of the initial 
oxygen 
concentration 
in 
the 
working 
volume.  For efficiently burned flue gasses 
(boilers, furnaces, etc.), this ratio is on the 
order of 0.002.  As can be seen most of our 
data is an order of magnitude above that.  
This indicates that microgravity flames are 
not very efficient. 
 
 
Although the absolute values of CO are 
very high in the 250 liter MSG working 
volume, the MSG contained and converted 
the CO to CO2 during the post-test work 
volume purge.  Since the ISS is quite large, 
the combustion products from a fire of the 
scale of a BASS-II test would quickly be 
diluted, so that even within just the US Lab 
(106 m3 pressurized volume), the CO levels 
in the lab would only be 1.5 ppm, well 
below 
SMAC 
(Spacecraft 
Maximum 
Allowable Concentration) values for even 
long term exposure (10 ppm), let alone the 1 
hour SMAC of 55 ppm [11].  
 
Lastly, the heat release rates (HRR) from 
these small microgravity fires can be 
estimated 
using 
Huggett’s 
oxygen 
consumption calorimetry [12] and the burn 
time for each test.  Using his constant of 
13.1 kJ/g O2, we estimate the heat release 
rate to be typically well below 100 W, as 
shown in Figure 8.   There is a trend of 
increasing HRR with increasing ambient 
oxygen concentration, and the scatter is 
attributed to the different duct flows 
between and even within the tests.   
 
The one long opposed thick slab test that 
caused the lower downstream corner of the 
front window damage released close to 
100W.  A prior relatively brief concurrent 
rod test that released almost 110 W did not 
cause any damage. 
 
IV. Global Equivalence Ratio 
 
To date, 34 burned BASS-II samples 
have been returned to Earth for post-flight 
analysis.  Eight of those samples had been 
used for multiple tests, and were altered on 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
Watts
O2 initial concentration, % by volume
Opposed rods
Concurrent rods
Opposed thick slab
Spherical section, stagnation
Figure 8.  Heat release rate during each test using oxygen 
consumption calorimetry.  The data from Figure 5 is converted to 
Watts using the burn time and Huggett’s constant, plotted against 
initial O2, showing the heat release rate generally increases with 
increasing ambient oxygen concentration.  The magnitude of the heat 
release rate is modest for these small flames. 
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
13.0
15.0
17.0
19.0
21.0
23.0
CO/CO2 ratio  of gas produced during test
Initial O2 for test, % by volume
Opposed rods
Concurrent rods
Opposed thin slabs
Opposed thick slabs
Spherical section, stagnation
 
Figure 7.  CO / CO2 ratio as a function of the initial oxygen 
concentration for each test.   There is some clustering apparent in 
the data, which shows that lower oxygen concentrations produce 
higher levels of CO per CO2 for concurrent rods, especially when 
compared to the opposed rods which shows the opposite trend.  The 
opposed slab data has a similar trend to the concurrent rod data, 
althought the scatter is large.   

=== PAGE 8 ===
 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
8
orbit by having their burned fuel cut 
off and/or their built-in igniter leads 
removed.  As a result, the pre and 
post-flight weights for these modified 
samples cannot be used to determine 
the mass loss due to combustion.  
Also, seven additional samples had 
burns that were so short that no 
oxygen consumption was measured, 
and so are not usable for the global 
equivalence ratio estimates.   
 
For the remaining 19 samples, 
mass loss is compared to oxygen 
consumption, as shown in Figure 9. 
 
 
There are clear trends observed 
for 
O2 
consumption 
and 
CO2 
generation relative to measured fuel 
mass loss.   Given the previous 
stoichiometric relation between O2 
and CO2, it is not surprising that the 
two trends mirror each other. The CO 
data is more scattered, but CO 
generation generally increases with 
increasing fuel mass loss. 
 
We can evaluate the fuel/oxygen ratio based upon these test results.   The global equivalence ratio can be 
expressed for either cellulose or PMMA fuel stoichiometry as 
 
 
 
 
 
Eq.(3) 
  
 
 
Using the ideal gas law, the free volume of MSG of V=250,000 cc, ideal gas constant R=82.05 cc-atm/gmol K, 
P= 1 atm, and T=300 K, the gmol of O2 consumed is calculated as 
 
Eq.(4) 
 
 
 
The gmol of fuel consumed is simply 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Eq.(5) 
 
Using the observed slope of 0.4582 O2% by vol / g fuel, and the molecular weight for pmma of 100 g/gmol for the 
majority of the data, we can use the above equations to solve for the effective equivalence ratio for the tests:  Φglobal 
= 1.3, which is fuel rich.    So in general, the flames were under-ventilated and did not burn all of the vaporized fuel.  
Some fuel ended up as soot, some as CO, and some as unburned hydrocarbons.   
 
 
Figure 9: Oxygen consumed, Carbon Dioxide and Carbon Monoxide 
generated per gram of fuel mass loss for two different fuels tested 
(cellulose and pmma).  

=== PAGE 9 ===
 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
9
V. Conclusions    
 
As part of the BASS-II experiment, we conducted a number of tests with different geometries, flow velocities, 
and initial oxygen concentrations.  The last variable was enabled by the use of gaseous nitrogen to dilute the 
working volume.  To adequately characterize this dilution, we developed a CSTR model and verified it against 
sensor readings.   
 
Sensor data from the tests showed that the oxygen was burning nearly stoichiometrically to CO2, and that CO 
levels appear to be a function of geometry and, in some cases, the flow velocity/geometry combination.    The 
CO/CO2 ratios for these fires are an order of magnitude higher than for efficient flue gases, indicating that these 
flames are not efficient.  The heat release was estimated for the tests using oxygen consumption calorimetry.  This 
showed that most of the tests released well below 100 Watts.  In the one long test that released close to 100W, we 
did sustain some damage to the downstream corner of the front window, due to a leak that directed the heat from this 
energetic flame to that location during the prolonged burn.  Using the mass loss data and oxygen consumption data, 
the global equivalence ratio for the tests is estimated to be 1.3 on average, which indicates the flames were burning 
fuel rich under the low velocity forced flow conditions. 
VI. Acknowledgments 
 
This work was funded by the ISS Research Project Office.  We want to acknowledge the invaluable assistance of 
all the astronauts who ran BASS and BASS-II.  This work couldn’t have been done without the intense efforts of the 
BASS operations team (Jay Owens, Chuck Bunnell, Tibor Lorik, and Carol Reynolds).  We also want to 
acknowledge the ground support teams at GRC, JSC, and MSFC that supported the BASS-II operations. 
VII. References 
 
1 
Olson, S. L.,  Ferkul, P. V., Bhattacharjee, S., Miller, F. J., Fernandez-Pello, A. C., and T’ien, J. S.;  “Burning and 
Suppression of Solids – II Fire Safety Investigation for the Microgravity Science Glovebox”, presented at the 29th annual 
meeting of the American Society for Gravitational and Space Research (ASGSR) and the 5th International Symposium on 
Physical Sciences in Space (ISPS), Orlando, FL,  Nov. 3-8, 2013. 
2 
http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/station/research/experiments/1262.html;  
http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/station/research/experiments/735.html 
3 
Limero, T., Beck, S., and James, J., "Evaluation of a Portable Carbon Dioxide Monitor for Use Aboard the International 
Space Station," SAE Technical Paper 2000-01-2433, 2000, doi:10.4271/2000-01-2433. 
4 
Limero, T., Beck, S., and James, J., "Development and Performance of the Oxygen Sensor in the CSA-CP Aboard the 
International Space Station," SAE Technical Paper 2004-01-2337, 2004, doi:10.4271/2004-01-2337. 
5 
Limero, T., Beck, S. W., & James, J. T. (2002). The Portable Monitor for Measuring Combustion Products Aboard the 
International Space Station (No. 2002-01-2298). SAE Technical Paper. 
6 
Steiner, G., McHard, R., Reysa, R., and Granaham, J.; “Accuracy Assessment of the Major Constituent Analyzer”, 2005-
2893, SAE Technical paper, 2005. 
7 
Reysa, R., Granahan, J., Steiner, G., Ransom, E., & Williams, D. E. (2004); “International Space Station (ISS) Major 
Constituent Analyzer (MCA) On-Orbit Performance” (No. 2004-01-2546). SAE Technical Paper. 
8 
Reggie A. Spivey, William A Sheredy, and Ginger Flores; "An Overview of The Microgravity Science Glovebox (MSG) 
Facility, and the Gravity-Dependent Phenomena Research Performed in the MSG on the International Space Station (ISS)", 
46th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, 7 - 10 January 2008, Reno, Nevada, AIAA-2008-812. 
9 
Dotson, K. T., Sunderland, P. B., Yuan, Z. G., & Urban, D. L. (2011). Laminar smoke points of coflowing flames in 
microgravity. Fire Safety Journal, 46(8), 550-555. 
10 Mass Constituents data from ISS,  data available online at https://mod2.jsc.nasa.gov/di/di52/constituentmonitor/ 
11 JSC 20584; “Spacecraft Maximum Allowable Concentrations for Airborne Contaminants”,  1999. 
12 Huggett, C. Estimation of Rate of Heat Release by Means of Oxygen Consumption Measurements, Fire Mater. 4, 61-65 
(1980). 
 
