
=== PAGE 1 ===
50th International Conference on Environmental Systems 
ICES-2021-218 
12-15 July 2021 
Copyright © 2021 Christian Eigenbrod, ZARM, University of Bremen, D-28359 Bremen 
Opposed flame spreading along a structured PMMA sample 
in exploration atmosphere under microgravity 
Christian Eigenbrod1 and Florian Meyer.2 
ZARM, University of Bremen, 28359 Bremen, Germany 
Grunde Jomaas3 
School of Engineering, University of Edinburgh, UK 
David L. Urban4, Gary A. Ruff5 and Sandra L. Olson6 
NASA Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, OH, USA 
Paul V. Ferkul7 
USRA, Cleveland, OH, USA 
Balazs Toth8 
ESA-ESTEC, Noordwijk, The Netherlands 
As part of SAFFIRE V experiments on the ISS supply spacecraft CYGNUS, flame 
propagation along different surface structures on a PMMA sample was investigated in 
opposed flow. The sample was 200 x 400 mm (length x width) with a thickness of 10 mm and 
contained ribs of different widths (1-10 mm), each 3 mm high, on both sides, arranged in the 
flow direction. The total thickness of the specimen was thus 16 mm for the ribs. For the first 
360 s after ignition with a Kanthal wire, the flow velocity was 20 cm/s in the opposed 
direction. Then the flow velocity was reduced to 5 cm/s for a duration of 300 s before it was 
switched off to terminate the experiment. The experimental pressure was 761 hPa and the 
oxygen concentration was 26.9 vol %. These conditions correspond to atmospheric 
conditions envisioned for future exploration missions. It was found that the flames ignited 
downstream propagated forward along the rib edges surprisingly fast with up to 0.88 mm/s 
(1 mm rib width). Also, it was observed that the wider the rib, the slower the propagation. 
The widest rib (10 mm) already showed two largely independent edge flames. 
Unintentionally, the experiment showed how sensitive the flames are to small perturbations 
of the flow field, as remnants of a preceding and upstream experiment disturbed the 
incoming flow stratification partially. 
I. Introduction 
ur expectations of the combustion of solid materials under 1g conditions are accustomed to their complexity 
even if we do not always understand the details underlying this process. In this respect, the combustion process 
under microgravity conditions may hold surprises, although the same laws apply there as on the ground. The results 
                                                           
1 Director of Combustion Eng. Working Group, ZARM University of Bremen, Am Fallturm, 28359 Bremen. 
2 Dep. Dir. of Combustion Eng. Working Group, ZARM University of Bremen, Am Fallturm, 28359 Bremen. 
3 Professor and BRE Chair of Fire Safety Engineering, University of Edinburgh, EH9 3FB, UK. 
4 Branch Chief, Combustion and Reacting Systems Branch, 21000 Brookpark Road, MS 77-5, Cleveland, OH 
44135. 
5 Physical Scientist, Space Technology Office, 21000 Brookpark Road, OH 44135, MS 77-7, Cleveland, OH OH 
44135. 
6 Spacecraft Fire Safety Researcher, 21000 Brookpark Road, OH 44135, MS 77-5, Cleveland, OH 44135. 
7 Staff Scientist, USRA, 21000 Brookpark Road, MS 110-3 Cleveland, OH 44135. 
8 ESA/ESTEC, Keplerlaan, 2201 Noordwijk, The Netherlands. 
O

=== PAGE 2 ===
 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
2
of a combustion test on the CYGNUS re-supply spacecraft in the context of the SAFFIRE V experiment discussed 
here show this impressively. While under 1g conditions a fire spreads preferentially upward with the convective 
flow and hardly against it downward, it is exactly the opposite in microgravity and forced flow even if the velocities 
of the spread differ. But the lower propagation velocities and burn rates in microgravity do not equate to reduced 
hazards, since much larger amounts of flammable flue gases are produced than on the ground. In matters of fire 
safety of an orbital habitat, it is therefore particularly important to understand the basic processes and their effects, 
and to derive standards from them that will, on the one hand, largely reduce the risk of fire occurrence and, on the 
other hand, allow reasonable strategies to minimize the spread of fire and its consequences. Current standards for 
material selection provide for 1g fire tests on upright flat specimens1-3. Of course, these conditions are different in a 
spacecraft - both in terms of gravitational conditions and material shape. 
If a sample of PMMA is ignited under 1g conditions, then large temperature gradients in conjunction with 
buoyancy convection ensure the emergence of strong velocity gradients in both upward and downward combustion. 
This leads to a local stretching of the flow field and consequently to the formation of vortices due to shear 
instabilities. This results in the well-known flickering of a flame, which is caused by the ingression of air with 
directional components normal to the direction of the buoyant flow. Figure 1 schematically shows the scenario of an 
upwardly directed combustion. 
Due to this mixing of air not only 
from below (in Figure 1 from left), there 
is always sufficient oxidant available for 
the pyrolysis gas. This leads to a blazing 
flame and to the fact that flame length 
and pyrolysis area grow steadily and the 
pyrolysis area spreads rapidly upwards 
over the surface of the sample. The air 
mixing also means that the combustion 
of the excess pyrolyzate can take place 
almost completely, at least in the case of 
the PMMA investigated here, so that 
hardly any soot or unburned MMA are 
produced. The main gases leaving the 
reaction zone at the top (to right in Figure 1) are CO2 and water. 
This is probably the most important difference in its effect to a corresponding fire scenario under microgravity 
and forced flow. In microgravity, however, the flow field remains stratified through the reaction zone in laminar 
flow despite thermal expansion and local density gradients due to the lack of weight differences. As a result, 
atmospheric oxygen can only reach the flame from upstream. This case, which is simpler in principle, has 
surprisingly far-reaching consequences. Figure 2 shows schematically the phenomena of µg combustion under 
forced concurrent flow conditions. 
By maintaining the stratification, only 
the flame base is sufficiently supplied 
with oxygen. The stationary flame length 
is as limited as its burning rate4. Under 
the flame, the material is heated up to the 
pyrolysis temperature, but pyrolyzate is 
protected by the flame against the entry 
of atmospheric oxygen and carried away 
with the flow. In addition to the exhaust 
gas, a considerable amount of potentially 
combustible flue gas is thus also 
produced. Since only the flame base is 
well oxygenated, there is no possibility for the burning zone to propagate across the material surface. Instead, the 
pyrolysis front propagates to a length where the radiant power of the flame is insufficient to reach the pyrolysis 
temperature. The flame base propagates at the rate at which the material is completely consumed at the leading edge. 
For given atmospheric conditions, the propagation speed of the flame base therefore depends mainly on the 
thickness of the material. The propagation of the burning zone with the flow, which is self-evident on Earth, is 
therefore rather unlikely in microgravity. If one increases the inflow velocity, from a certain flow velocity on, the 
 
Figure 1. Terminology 
and 
basic 
phenomena 
in 
upward
combustion under 1g conditions. 
Flame base
Flame length
Pyrolysis front
Pyrolysis area
PMMA
Exhaust gas
1g- upward burning
Buoyant flow
 
Figure 2. Terminology and basic phenomena in concurrent
combustion under microgravity. 
Flame base
Flame length
Pyrolysis front
Pyrolysis area
PMMA
Flue gas
Exhaust gas
µg-concurrent burning
Forced flow

=== PAGE 3 ===
 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
3
flame lifts off, jumps repeatedly back to its base before it extincts. So there might be a very small and sensitive 
velocity range in which a lifted flame is very slowly driven over the preheated surface, but not yet blown out. But 
this has not been observed during blowoff-tests on burning rod tips in microgravity4 where this burning regime was 
unstable marking the transition to blow-off. 
Flame propagation against the incident flow occurs on Earth very slowly compared to its spread rate in 
concurrent flow. As this propagation happens in the flow boundary layer with decreasing velocity towards the wall it 
is the faster, the lower the pressure and the thicker the related boundary layer is5. Any additional forced flow leads to 
an increase of the local burning rate, but also reduces the velocity of the flame base against the incident flow. This is 
different in microgravity: even at low flow velocities, the flame base propagates rapidly against the flow. The faster 
the incoming flow becomes, the more oxygen reaches the base and the faster the flame propagates against it. Figure 
3 schematically shows the corresponding scenario.  
The most active combustion zone is the 
flame base that is best supplied with 
oxygen. 
Consequently, 
it 
propagates 
preferentially in the direction of fresh air. 
As with concurrent combustion, the flame 
length is finite and it produces a lot of 
unburned 
flue 
gas 
underneath. 
Downstream of the zone with sufficient 
pyrolysis temperature, the flame leaves a 
zone with burnt surface. Analogous to 
concurrent combustion, there must be an 
upper limit to the inflow velocity at which 
flow velocity and flame propagation velocity reach equilibrium and where the flame base becomes stationary and 
works its way into the depth of the material. This marks the limit towards blowoff. 
 
What has been described applies to thick materials, as studied in SAFFIRE V, which cannot be assumed to be 
isothermal to depth. If the materials are very thin, flame base and burnout end coincide. Then the phenomena of 
concurrent and opposed combustion are comparable6. However, spread rate and its dependence on flow and pressure 
remain different. What actually propagates is the material edge and with it inevitably the flame base. 
The case studied in SAFFIRE V 
includes another important aspect caused 
by the material shape. Figure 4 shows the 
situation initially for a flat specimen not in 
a lateral but in a frontal section. The 
shown stable stratified situation changes 
towards the not shown edges. In this 
respect, this is the situation in the center of 
the burning specimen. In the current qualification standards, however, the edges should also be protected against 
burning. As is typical for a diffusion flame, the combustible exhaust gases are produced on the fuel-rich side of the 
reaction zone. It becomes clear that, with a flow into the image plane, after a certain run length diffusion of oxidant 
perpendicular to the flow can no longer play a significant role in mass transport. 
This changes if, as in SAFFIRE V, the specimen is equipped with ribs of different widths arranged in the 
direction of flow. Figure 5 schematically 
shows this situation. The edges of the ribs 
are thermally irradiated by the surrounding 
flame both from above and from the side. 
This is offset by the lower heat capacity of 
the edges, which together leads to a 
substantially increased heating rate of the 
edges. As a result, the edges burn 
preferentially, and the flame base advances 
along the edges. The qualitatively depicted 
shape of the pyrolyzing layer in the 
material thus also corresponds to the shape of a thermal isoline. If the rib is narrow, the edges interfere and a largely 
 
Figure 3. Terminology and basic phenomena in opposed flow
combustion under microgravity. 
Flame base
Flame length
Pyrolysis front
Pyrolysis area
PMMA
Preheat zone
Exhaust gas
µg-opposed burning
Forced flow
Flue gas
Burnt area
 
Figure 4. Schematic section through the layers above a 
burning flat sample under microgravity. 
PMMA
Reaction zone
Pyrolysing layer
Sample blowing
Radiative heating
Exhaust gas
Flue gas
 
Figure 5. Schematic representation of flames over ribs 
arranged in the direction of flow under microgravity. 
PMMA
Reaction zone
Radiative heating
Sample blowing
Pyrolysing layer
Air diffusion
Exhaust gas
Flue gas

=== PAGE 4 ===
 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
4
closed flame forms around both edges, reinforcing each other. If the rib is wide, the interaction between the edges 
decreases and two edge flames are observed. Again, as long as the two edges are not far enough apart to be two 
single step flames, the base of the flame will propagate faster than with a single step. If adjacent ribs are not far 
enough apart, then they too accelerate propagation via radiative exchange. In this case, the propagation of the flame 
base is so fast that, if the ribs are not far enough apart, there is insufficient heating between them and the valleys 
consequently do not burn. This probably leads to a further effect accelerating the propagation speed, which consists 
in the fact that at the flame base oxygen can also reach the reaction zone from the valleys and over a short diffusion 
length, i.e. with a component normal to the flow direction. Since the thickness of the laminar flow boundary layer is 
pressure-dependent, this effect should also be pressure-dependent if the geometry is constant. 
II. Experimental Setup 
The SAFFIRE V experiment consists in its 
core of a rectangular wind tunnel with a height of 
305 mm, a width of 460 mm and a length of 
1100 mm. This has remained basically the same 
through all SAFFIRE campaigns7, 8. The apparatus 
has been improved in many details and equipped 
with additional sensors, which also investigate the 
effect of the large-scale combustion experiments 
on the atmosphere of the spacecraft. The apparatus 
inhales the surrounding atmosphere of the 
spacecraft, accelerates and laminarizes it to the 
desired flow velocity, and returns it to the 
atmosphere of the spacecraft at the exit of the 
wind tunnel. For the experiment described here, 
the atmospheric pressure inside CYGNUS was 
lowered to 761 hPa and the oxygen content was 
increased to 26.9 vol% by enrichment. Figure 6 
shows that these conditions on the HYPOXIC 
curve are close to the point of future planned 
exploration missions (700 hPa/ 26.5 vol% O2). 
The specimen studied is shown in Figure 7. It 
consists of cast PMMA of 10 mm thickness, on 
which ribs of widths 1–10 mm are attached on 
both sides in the direction of flow. The distance 
between the ribs is 
20 mm. 
The 
determination of these 
distances as largely 
interaction-free 
was 
based on the results of 
SAFFIRE II test9, in 
which 
a 
specimen 
with a central groove 
was examined. Next to 
this, horizontal ribs, 
each 1.5 mm wide and 
with 
rib 
spacing 
increasing 
in 
the 
direction of flow, are 
placed transversely to 
the direction of flow. 
All ribs are 3 mm 
high. 
The 
distance 
 
Figure 6. Atmospheric condition at the start of the 
experiment (red dot) relative to the NORMOXIC and 
HYPOXIC 
curves 
and 
the 
conditions 
currently 
envisioned for future exploration missions (blue dot). 
0.0
10.0
20.0
30.0
40.0
50.0
60.0
70.0
80.0
90.0
100.0
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
vol % O2
hPa
NORMOXIC-Curve
vol % O2 at const. O2 part. press. of 209 hPa
HYPOXIC-Curve
vol% O2 at const. O2 part. press. of 185.5 hPa
Normoxic
Hypoxic
 
Figure 7. Geometry of the both-sides burning specimen made of PMMA cast and 
provided with surface structures. The red dots indicate the position of two 
thermocouplesTC4 and TC7. All dimensions in mm. 

=== PAGE 5 ===
 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
5
between the structures and the edge of the specimen is 30 mm on both sides. The specimen is provided with a 
resistance heating wire at both ends for ignition. To facilitate ignition, the specimen is tapered towards the ignition 
ends over a length of 4 mm to a thickness of 5 mm. This is followed by a ramp which reaches the height of the upper 
edge of the structures after a length of 13.53 mm. It was planned to ignite the Figure 7 sample first at the upstream 
end (concurrent) and to ignite it again at the downstream end (opposed) in a later experiment. The ignition of the 
first experiment failed because the igniter had apparently lost its electrical contact. In this respect, the experiment 
was limited to the trial in opposed flow configuration. In this respect, the horizontal ribs, on which it was to be 
tested in concurrent configuration whether and how the flame jumps from rib to rib, play no role here. As will be 
shown later, however, it turned out to be an advantage that the sample had not yet been burned by the upstream end. 
The experimental module was equipped with three samples, mounted in one plane at half channel height, which 
were processed one after the other. The sample treated here was sandwiched between an upstream cotton sample 
400 mm wide and 500 mm long and a flat PMMA sample 5 mm thick, 400 mm wide and 200 mm long. The other 
two samples were processed prior to the experiment described here. 
Figure 8 shows the conditions at the beginning of the test. It can be clearly seen that the cotton sample did not 
burn without residues, and that the residues therefore represented an obstacle which influenced the flow of the 
structured PMMA sample, as shown later. 
The experiment first 
starts with a 10 min phase 
during which the resistance 
heating wire is energized 
with a power of 2.5 W for 
10 min. This heats the 
ignition 
region 
of 
the 
sample, and facilitates the 
subsequent ignition with 
30 W for one minute. This 
takes 
into 
account 
the 
experience with previous 
experiments 
with 
thick 
PMMA samples that this 
minimizes 
the 
risk 
of 
burning through the heating 
wire during the otherwise 
longer ignition phase and 
also makes it easier to 
pyrolyze the ignition area, 
reducing 
the 
risk 
of 
extinction after the ignition 
power is switched off. The flow is ramped up to 20 cm/s and once stationary, the preheating and subsequent ignition 
sequence is started. After the heating power is increased to the ignition power the flow condition of 20 cm/s is 
maintained for 360 s before the velocity is reduced to 5 cm/s for another 300 s. This second firing period at reduced 
flow is also inserted for safety reasons to cool the sample down at reduced power before the flow is shut off. This is 
to prevent hot pyrolysis gas from accumulating and possibly igniting. However, this long burn time at reduced speed 
incidentally provides a second experimental condition. 
During the experiment, the progress of combustion is recorded frontally (as in Figure 8) at a frequency of 30 fps 
and from the side at the same frequency in the visible spectral range. A green LED light is used to expose the sample 
with a frequency of 0.5 Hz for three frames (0.1 s). 
III. Results and Discussion 
Before the evaluation, all images were first distortion corrected and the images taken with automatic camera gain 
were normalized to the brightness value of the darkest images during 5 cm/s. 
 
Figure 8. Left: Remains of the cotton sample, Middle: Sample before ignition 
started, Right: Remains of the 5 mm PMMA sample. Incident flow from left. 

=== PAGE 6 ===
 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
6
The first indication that the incident flow is not perfectly stratified everywhere is provided by the moment of 
ignition. This occurs in a deflagration, which is typical for the ignition of a premixture gradually developing during 
the warm-up period and which was also observed during earlier experiments, but here it is much more violent than 
normal. The Figure 9 shows successive images of the moment of ignition. The ignition point from which the flame 
spreads across the entire width of the sample can also be seen. The rather strong deflagration is probably due to the 
fact that the slightly disturbed inflow led to a partial mixing and dilution of the pyrolysis gases. This leads to delayed 
ignition until a sufficient concentration of OH radicals has accumulated with subsequent thermal runaway, and a 
larger quantity of premixed combustible fuel-air mixture has accumulated. 
Figure 10 shows two snapshots during the steady flow of 20 cm/s (after 260 s) and during the steady flow of 
5 cm/s (after 600 s). It can be clearly seen how the flame base propagates along the ribs. The propagation speed is 
impressive, as is the precision with which propagation speed and rib width are correlated. In the following, the ribs 
are labeled 1 to 10 according to their width in mm from top to bottom in Figure 10. At first glance, it can be seen 
that either rib 7 lags a little, or ribs 8-10 lead a little. This will become clearer in the following quantitative 
evaluation. The cause for this is also suspected to be an inflow that does not remain perfectly stratified and fires up 
the flames due to the associated mixing in of additional oxidizer. It can also be seen immediately that already the 
flame front of rib 2 shows a rectangular profile, corresponding to two closely spaced propagation fronts along the 
two edges. As the rib width increases, the two fronts become more distinct and different velocities become visible. 
Nevertheless, the two edge flames influence each other because the difference in front positions along a rib remains 
limited. These differences balance out with decreasing firing rate at 5 cm/s. Here, obviously, the individual edge 
flame loses strength and the range of interaction increases accordingly. Both during 20 cm/s and during 5 cm/s, two 
flame fronts can be recognized in the case of ribs 8-10. During the progressive combustion, a total of 4 flames 
become visible on these ribs. It is assumed that the trailing flame front is the shining through of the rear-side flame, 
which progresses at slightly different velocities. Front and rear side can be distinguished by intensity and sharpness. 
In this case, the flame bases most ahead are located on the front side of the specimen. The fact that the difference is 
only visible at ribs 8-10 also speaks for slightly different flow conditions on the front and back side here. 
 
Figure 9. Deflagration type of ignition. Recording interval 33 ms. 

=== PAGE 7 ===
 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
7
One can notice that the flames, after they have detached from the trailing edge, have a limited length. This means 
that the shadowing effect10 through the flame prevents oxygen from reaching downstream regions. As described in 
the introduction, this results in a finite flame length in contrast to 1g conditions. The fact that the areas behind the 
flame are extinguished, although there must still be fuel raised above the base surface, means conversely that a 
flame cannot move in the opposite direction downstream as the flame isolates the fuel downstream against oxygen 
as long as the flame base has not consumed the fuel totally at the leading edge and moves downstream with the 
burnout end. This shadowing effect is also evident in rib 2. After 290 s, during the 20 cm/s burning period, the flame 
of rib 1 reaches the leading edge of the specimen. Once there, it gradually spread out in width along the leading 
edge. After 567 s, i.e. already during the 5 cm/s burning period, it has spread in front of flame 2. At this point, flame 
2 is still 28 mm apart from the leading edge and extinguishes in the shadow of the flame in front of it. In Figure 10 
on the right, the flame of rib 2 has already gone out. 
Not only does rib 7 lag behind, it also shows the edge flames with the lowest luminosity throughout the 
experiment. During the flow is ramping down to 5 cm/s, the flames of rib 7 extinguish after 10 s. This is associated 
with an unfavorable incident flow, as will be shown later. 
Figure 11shows the results of CFD simulations on the influence of the structures of the specimen on the flow 
field in a non-reacting situation. At the test pressure of 761 hPa, the laminar flow boundary layer reaches a thickness 
of almost 50 mm. As a result, in the top picture, one can see an influence of the flow by the specimen as a whole, but 
 
Figure 10. 
Steady-state firing progress: left after 260 s (20 cm/s), right after 600 s (5 cm/s). Incoming 
flow from the left. 

=== PAGE 8 ===
 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
8
hardly any influence of the structures, which protrude only 3 mm above the specimen. If one zooms in a little closer 
to the horizontal ribs, one sees local disturbances, but their values are very small and have very little influence on 
the flow field shown in color. It can be seen, however, that the flame in the shallow area, downstream of the 
horizontal ribs, can have a problem when it approaches the deadwater area behind the last rib. This location was 
reached by the end of the test. Not shown, however, is the effect of the flame. The thermal expansion associated 
with it forms a much larger object that affects the flow field more than the ribs. 
In this respect, the effect of the 
cotton residues upstream of the 
structured sample which were not 
simulated as its geometry is not 
known enough must be taken into 
account. Figure 12 
shows 
a 
visualization of the flow field by 
smoke filaments generated at a 
height of approx. 50 mm above the 
sample, before and after the tests. 
First, on the left, one can see 
the uniformity of the flow field 
and the good agreement with the 
simulation in Figure 11, and on the 
right, one can see the disturbances 
caused by the cotton residues. In 
particular, the region around ribs 
6-8 is bypassed by the streamlines, 
while the streamlines in the region 
of ribs 9 and 10 are compressed 
and swirled. In particular, the 
streamline in the region of rib 9 is 
pressed downward, tightly over the 
specimen, 
during 
the 
entire 
recording time. While it remains 
stretched in the side view, it is swirled horizontally in the top view. The flow is relatively little disturbed in the area 
of ribs 1-4 and above the horizontal ribs. This should be taken into account in the quantitative evaluation. The 
 
Figure 11. 
CFD simulations of how the cold flow field is influenced 
by the sample structure. Cross-section at the center of the horizontal 
ribs.
 
Figure 12. 
Flow visualization before (left) and after (right) the experiments. The flow disturbing 
residues of the cotton sample are as well visible as it´s effect on the total propagation at the trailing edge. 

=== PAGE 9 ===
 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
9
position of the pyrolysis front along the various structures is also very well discernible, showing that only in the 
interstices of ribs 8-10 and towards the edges of the sample has there been any appreciable propagation. This can be 
easily explained by the downwardly pressed and horizontally swirled incident flow and, towards the edges, by the 
denser adjacent flow as well as the protruding outer specimen edges. The fact that there was no even stronger 
propagation along the edges is again due to heat losses in the aluminum mask holding the specimen, which engages 
in a groove on the outside and has a distance of only 4 mm from the specimen edge. This effect was already 
observed with the similarly held samples of the SAFFIRE II experiment9. 
 
For the quantita-
tive 
evaluation, 
Figure 13 first shows 
the lines and their 
names along which 
an automatic evalua-
tion was performed. 
Figure 14 shows the 
propagation 
fronts 
over time. For this 
purpose, 
the 
first 
time 
a 
brightness 
threshold 
was 
exceeded 
was 
defined as the flame 
base 
along 
the 
evaluation 
lines, 
looking from bottom 
to top. It can be seen 
how 
amazingly 
constant the propagation velocities at 20 cm/s and 5 cm/s become after a start-up and transition time, respectively. 
Only the flames 2ab deviate from this during 5 cm/s, since they are gradually shadowed by the flame of rib 1 until 
they are extinguished after 567 s, and the flames 9ab also deviate during 5 cm/s. The reason for this must be a 
change in the incident flow with the velocity change, since flames 9ab were still in front of ribs 8 and 10 during 
20 cm/s, 
but 
fall 
behind them with the 
slower incident flow 
(Figure 
10). 
The 
velocities 
averaged 
over the fronts a and 
b 
are 
shown 
in 
Figure 15. 
 
As can be seen in 
Figure 
15, 
the 
propagation velocit-
ies follow an inverse 
potential relationship 
(blue). 
Rib 
7 
is 
behind 
the 
trend 
while ribs 8-10 are 
ahead of the trend. 
Therefore (in red) 
the trend 
line is 
determined only with 
ribs 1-6 and extrapolated to rib 10. It can be seen that the correlation improves and that the deviations are more 
evident with ribs 8-10. The high propagation speed along the edge is determined by the higher heating rate there. 
 
Figure 13. 
Lines and their designation along which the evaluation was 
performed. 
 
Figure 14. 
Propagation of the flame base along all evaluation lines. Time from 
start of ignition. 
0
50
100
150
200
60
160
260
360
460
560
660
760
Flame Base Propagation [mm]
Time [s]
rib 1
rib 2ab extinction
rib 3ab
flat ab
rib 4ab
rib 5ab
rib 6 and 8ab
rib 9 and 10ab
20 cm/s
5 cm/s

=== PAGE 10 ===
 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
10
Here, the surface over which radiation is absorbed plays a role, as well as the heated volume into which the heat is 
conducted. According to Delzeit et al.11, the internal edge angle determines the propagation velocity. However, since 
this is the same for all ribs, the mutual amplification of the two edge flames, which decreases with increasing rib 
width, must cause the different propagation rate. Thus, the heating rate is initially determined by the surface/volume 
ratio. In the 2-D representation, the radiation absorbing surface area becomes the contour length via the cross-
section, and the rib volume becomes the cross-sectional area of the rib. If one divides the contour length (2 x rib 
height + rib width) by the rib cross-sectional area and applies this over the ribs, one obtains a potential curve, which 
is additionally entered in Figure 15 as a dashed green line and makes the relationship seem obvious. In fact, the 
wider ribs should not follow this curve exactly, because here there are no longer completely closed edge flames, but 
two edge flames and a flat-area flame in between, whose effects overlap. Thus, the wider the rib becomes, the more 
should the propagation velocity be below this trend. There is another interaction which determines the heating rate, 
and which is not taken into account in the heating rate defined above: if the rib´s elevation above the base plate is 
low, then the angle between the base plate and the rib (to be referred to as the exterior angle according to Delzeit et 
al.11) must have a cooling effect via the heat receiving surface area which is increased here compared to the heat 
emitting flame. In this respect, the height of the ribs, and not only their widths, also plays an influencing role. Since 
the heights were not varied here, its quantities remain open. Regardless of whether the wider ribs are two 
independent edge flames or two mutually amplifying edge flames, they must in any case always propagate faster 
than the flames of the flat area, and extrapolation of the trend lines into the flat area is not permissible. This becomes 
particularly clear when the inflow velocity is reduced by 75%. For all flames, the propagation velocity is reduced by 
a comparable percentage of about 75%, consistent with the thermal theory of de Ris12 for thick fuels that predicts 
flame spread rate varies linearly with the flow velocity. This can vice versa be taken as an indication that reducing or 
switching off the air circulation, if operationally possible, can be a very suitable fire-fighting measure. 
 
The determination of the flame lengths is shown in Figure 16. The evaluation was carried out by the additional 
determination of a point along the lines at which a brightness threshold value was undershot. The flame length here 
 
Figure 15. 
Propagation speed of the flame base at 20 cm/s and 5 cm/s. Blue: experiments and it´s trend, 
red: trendline calculated with ribs 1 through 6 only, green: rib´s surface/volume ratio. 
y = 0.783x-0.646
R² = 0.9616
y = 0.8376x-0.726
R² = 0.9912
y = 2.1258x-0.632
R² = 0.9859
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Flat
Surface/Volume [1/mm]
Propagation velocity [mm/s]
Rib width [mm]
Flame propagation velocity
opposed flow, 20 cm/s, 761 hPa, 26.9 vol% O2
y = 0.1722x-0.356
R² = 0.447
y = 0.2625x-0.72
R² = 0.9223
y = 2.1258x-0.632
R² = 0.9859
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Flat
Surface/Volume [1/mm]
Propagation velocity [mm/s]
Rib width [mm]
Flame propagation velocity
opposed flow, 5 cm/s, 761 hPa; 26.9 vol% O2
 
Figure 16. 
Flame lengths at 20 cm/s and 5 cm/s. 
0
20
40
60
80
100
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Flat
Flame length [mm]
Rib width [mm]
Flame Length
opposed flow, 20 cm/s, 761 hPa, 26.9 vol% O2
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Flat
Flame length [mm]
Rib width [mm]
Flame Length
opposed flow, 5 cm/s, 761 hPa; 26.9 vol% O2

=== PAGE 11 ===
 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
11
refers to the brightness of the normalized image values and is used for comparison. It is therefore not to be equated 
with the chemical length of the reaction zone, e.g. by measuring the OH concentration, due to the lack of 
diagnostics.  
If one also assumes here an influence by different inflow conditions in the area of ribs 7-10, then the values of 
the remaining ribs speak for a comparable finite flame length. Thus, although one rib region is preheated by the 
flame passing over it, this region does not continue to burn and does not result in a flame that increases in length 
with time. Again, this is a clear indication that propagation may preferably, if not exclusively, be opposed. The 
flame lengths of ribs 7-10 are overestimated because for all rib flames a reliable measurement of length is possible 
only after the flames have separated from the trailing edge, i.e., after there is a non-burning sample region behind the 
flame. This condition was not reached for ribs 7-10 because of too short test time and/or because of swirled inflow. 
In this respect, the end of the flame remained "pinned" to the trailing edge of the specimen. For ribs 7-10 the length 
of this pinned flame at the end of each flow condition is displayed in Figure 16. Therefore no error bar is given. This 
pinned flame situation changed after the transition to 5 cm/s. During the transition, flames 8-10 began to extinguish 
for 40 s and were repeatedly reignited from the trailing edge. In particular, rib 9 exhibited this striking behavior 
which is indicated the large error bars in right part of Figure 16. After 40 s, this behavior came to rest and the flames 
of ribs 8-10 were now off the sample trailing edge. It is remarkable that all ribs now show a single closed blue 
flame, so that no individual edge flames can be detected. With a weak inflow and thus reduced flame power, the 
difference between edge behavior and surface behavior seems to balance out. 
 
In order to get a better picture of the possible effect of the inflow perturbations, intensity fluctuations of the 
flames are evaluated. The assumption is that the more turbulent and thus the more unsteady the incident flow, the 
stronger the intensity fluctuations of the flames should be. For this purpose, an evaluation range is first defined for 
each rib, which spans the length of the flame vertically and is defined horizontally for each rib in such a way that the 
luminous region is completely contained. Figure 17 shows the standard deviation of the brightness of this area from 
the mean value over the entire test period. The unit is the brightness value as deviation from the mean value and can 
take values between 0 and 255. 
Here, large deviations become apparent, especially at 20 cm/s. The deviations from the mean brightness value 
reflect the displacement and vorticity of the incident flow from Figure 12 on the right very well. Only rib 1 shows 
intensity fluctuations, which were not to be expected from Figure 12. However, the snapshot of Figure 10 already 
shows that rib 1 carries a conspicuous flame. It can be assumed that Figure 17 represents a very good image of the 
inflow conditions and that, on the basis of this, a good classification of the quantitative values can be made. The 
flames calm down at 5 cm/s and their intensity variations become very similar. Here, the flat area stands out, which 
is due to the strongly flickering flame of the back side, which shines through to the result of the front side. However, 
when looking at all the images of the recorded video, it can be assumed as certain that the position of the TC 4 
thermocouple, which lies on the evaluation line of the flat area b, shows idiosyncratic combustion processes, which 
are to be associated with the installation and bonding of the thermocouple. 
 
Figure 17. 
Standard deviation from mean flame brightness for 20 cm/s and 5 cm/s. 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Flat
Std. dev. from mean brightness
Rib width [mm]
Flame Flickering
opposed flow, 20 cm/s, 761 hPa, 26.9 vol% O2
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Flat
Std. dev. from mean brightness
Rib width [mm]
Flame Flickering
opposed flow, 5 cm/s, 761 hPa; 26.9 vol% O2

=== PAGE 12 ===
 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
12
IV. Conclusion 
To investigate the effect of structures on opposed flame propagation, a PMMA specimen of 10 mm basic 
thickness with vertical ribs of identical height above the basis (3 mm) and different widths (1 -10 mm) was ignited at 
the downstream end during SAFFIRE V. 
It could be shown that flames propagate very fast along exposed edges in opposed flow. This propagation 
depends on the heating rate and is therefore faster the closer the edges are to each other. The propagation velocity 
follows an inverse power relationship, which is based on the heating rate determined by the surface/volume ratio. 
In comparison to SAFFIRE II, where two edges of a wide groove were investigated in concurrent flow, it could 
be shown that flames propagate with the flow along edges or over a surface only in exceptional cases. This is 
particularly evident from the fact that the flames in this opposed flow experiments assume a finite and largely 
stationary length and do not span a burning surface during propagation. 
In both opposed and concurrent flow, the amount of potentially combustible flue gas formed under the flame 
increases with time which correlates with the increasing heated and pyrolyzing area underneath the flame. 
The velocity of propagation is largely proportional to the inflow velocity, consistent with thermal theory of de 
Ris12. 
Even very small disturbances of the stratification can clearly demonstrably favor combustion. Since any active 
firefighting measure also forces a disturbance of the stable stratification, it is obvious to alternatively consider a 
shutdown of the air circulation as the primary control measure. This conclusion is strengthened primarily by the fact 
that the experimental conditions studied here are idealized conditions of inflow with as little vorticity as possible. In 
the real scenario, where the flow is affected by corners, edges, and cross-section changes, as well as by human 
activity, flow calming must be particularly effective. One lesson to be learned from the previous SAFFIRE IV 
experiment, where a deflagration destroyed the apparatus after the cutoff flow was restarted after a short period, is 
that actively cooling the still burning material by reducing the flow rather than completely shutting it down may be a 
better way to avoid flashover effects. 
Acknowlegements 
Financial support through the German Space Administration, DLR, for enabling the evaluation and 
accompanying ground investigations within the "TOPOFLAME II" project under grant number 50WM2064 is 
gratefully acknowledged. Special thanks to NASA´s Human Exploration and Operations Directorate, for the 
opportunity to conduct this exciting experiment within their program. 
References 
1ECSS, 5. February 2010, “ECSS-Q-ST-70-21-C”, ESA Requirements and Standards Division, 2010. 
2ISO, ISO/TS 16697, “ISO/TS 16697 Space systems - Safety and compatibility of materials - Methods to determine the 
flammability threshold of materials”, ISO, 2012. 
3NASA, “NASA-STD-6001B, Flammability, Offgassing and Compatibility Requirements and Test Procedures”, NASA, 2016. 
4Olson, S. L. and Ferkul, P. V., “Microgravity ﬂammability boundary for PMMA rods in axial stagnation ﬂow: Experimental 
results and energy balance analyses”, Combustion and Flame, 2017-180, 2017, 12. 
5Thomsen, M., Fernandez-Pello, A. C., Huang, X., Olson, S. L. and Ferkul, P. V., “Opposed flow burning of PMMA cylinders in 
normoxic atmospheres”, Fire Safety Journal, 110-2019, 2019, 102903. 
6Olson, S. L. and Miller, F. J., “Experimental comparison of opposed and concurrent flame spread in a forced convective 
microgravity environment”, Proc. Combust. Inst., 32-2009, 2009, 8. 
7Ruff, G. A. and Urban, D. L., “Large-Scale Spacecraft Fire Safety Experiments in ISS Resupply Vehicles”, 29th  American 
Society for Gravitational and Space Research, Orlando, FL, 2013, . 
8Joomas, G., et al., “Fire safety in space – beyond flammability testing of small samples”, Acta Astronautica, 109-2015, 2015, 8. 
9Eigenbrod, C., et al., “Experimental Results on the Effect of Surface Structures on the Flame Propagation Velocity of PMMA in 
Microgravity”, 47th International Conference on Environmental Systems, ICES 2017-67, Charleston, SC, 2017, 1-10. 
10McGrattan, K. B., Kashiwagi, T., Baum, H. R. and Olson, S. L., “Effects of ignition and wind on the transition to flame spread 
in a microgravity environment”, Combustion and Flame, 106-4, 1996, 377-391. 
11Delzeit, T., Carmignani, L., Matsuoka, T. and Bhattacharjee, S., “Influence of edge propagation on downward flame spread 
over three-dimensional PMMA samples”, Proc. Combust. Inst., 37-2019, 2019, 7. 
12De Ris, J. N., “Spread of a laminar diffusion flame”, Symposium (International) on Combustion, 12-1, 1969, 241-252. 
 
