
=== PAGE 1 ===
50th International Conference on Environmental Systems 
ICES-2021-102 
11-15 July 2021 
Determining the Cause of Reduced Concurrent Flame Spread over 
Thin Solid Fuels in Low Pressure and Low Gravity 
Maria Thomsen1 , Luca Carmignani2 and Carlos Fernandez-Pello3 
Dept. Mechanical Engineering, University of California Berkeley, CA 94720 
Sonia Fereres4 
Abengoa, Sevilla 41014, Spain 
and 
David L. Urban5 and Gary A. Ruff 6 
NASA Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, OH 44135 
The spread of flames over the surface of solid combustible materials is affected by the 
environmental conditions. Variables such as flow velocity, oxygen concentration, ambient 
pressure, partial gravity or microgravity, may change the material flammability and influence 
the fire dynamics. This is an important fire safety issue for space exploration vehicles and 
space habitats which will very likely have different environments than those currently used 
on the International Space Station, such as reduced pressure and enriched oxygen 
concentration (SEA). However, testing experimentally the materials to be used and qualified 
for space exploration under these conditions is a difficult and expensive task. Here, numerical 
modeling is used to understand the dominant physico-chemical processes on the concurrent 
flame spread over thin fabrics under reduced ambient pressure (and in turn, buoyancy) and 
variable gravitational conditions. The numerical model uses the Fire Dynamics Simulator 
(FDS6) code with a single-step Arrhenius reaction rate for the solid phase decomposition. 
Different models are tested for the gas phase combustion kinetics. The model results are 
validated with experimental results obtained at similar reduced ambient pressure and flow 
conditions at 1 g. It is shown that as ambient pressure is reduced the flame spread rate over a 
thin fabric is also reduced, both experimentally and numerically. Numerical results are 
compared to an analytical approach previously developed to explain the experimental trends. 
Further interpretation of the model results provides information regarding the physics of the 
process and how they are affected by the lower pressure environments and gravity conditions. 
The results of this work provide guidance for potential on-earth testing for fire safety design 
in spacecraft and space habitats. 
I. Introduction 
he flammability of solid combustible materials is typically characterized by their ignitability, flame spread rate, 
heat release rate, and toxicity. Although the most effective fire safety strategy is to prevent ignition altogether, if 
ignition occurs the fire must spread to present a risk. For this reason, flame spread is one of the fire processes utilized 
                                                          
1 Postdoctoral Researcher, Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of California Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, 
94720, USA. 
2 Postdoctoral researcher, Mechanical Engineering Dept., 60 Hesse Hall, Berkeley, CA, 94720 
3 Professor of the Graduate Division, Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of California Berkeley, 
Berkeley, CA, 94720, USA. 
4 Senior Engineer, Aerospace & Defense Division, Abengoa Innovación, Energía Solar 1, 41014 Sevilla, Spain 
5 Branch Chief, Low-Gravity Exploration Technology Branch, MS 77-5, 21000 Brookpark Road, Cleveland, OH 
44135 
6 Spacecraft Fire Safety Demonstration Project Manager, Exploration Systems Office, MS 162-7, 21000 Brookpark 
Road, Cleveland, OH 44135 
T 

=== PAGE 2 ===
 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
2
to determine the flammability of solid combustible materials [1,2]. A flame spreads over a solid fuel surface by first 
preheating the virgin fuel to its pyrolysis, pyrolyzing it, and igniting the resulting flammable mixture of pyrolyzate 
and oxygen. Thus, the flame propagates in a creeping fashion as a series of ignition steps where the flame acts both 
as the source of heating and flammable gas ignition [1–3]. Thus, the spread of flames over the surface of a solid is a 
complex phenomenon resulting from a number of processes occurring in both the solid phase (heat transfer, thermal 
decomposition, gasification) and the gas phase (transport, mixing, combustion) which are very much affected by 
external environmental conditions such as oxidizer flow velocity, pressure, oxygen concentration, buoyancy (gravity 
level) or external heating. Thus, there is an interest in studying the effect of environmental conditions on flame spread.  
Concurrent, or flow assisted, flame spread occurs when the spread of the flame and the gas flow are in the same 
direction (upward spread in buoyant flow). Because the gas flow assists the transfer of heat from the flame to the solid 
and consequently the spread of the flame, this mode of flame spread is generally fast and consequently hazardous. It 
is for this reason that some material flammability tests use this mode of flame spread to characterize the fire hazard of 
combustible materials. In this flame spread configuration, the solid preheating and pyrolysis rates are dominated by 
convection and flame radiation, and the external flow velocity will therefore influence both the flame length and the 
heat flux from the flame to the solid surface [4–8]. Since there are marked differences in the velocity distributions in 
flame induced buoyant flows at different pressure [9] and gravity levels [10], it is expected that there will be also 
notable differences in the spread of flames. The ambient pressure affects, through the density, the thickness of the 
boundary layer, and consequently the position of the flame respect to the solid surface (Fig. 1). As the pressure is 
reduced the boundary layer thickens, the flame moves away from the surface, and the heat transferred from the flame 
to the solid surface is reduced. Consequently, the rate of flame spread is reduced, both because the reduced heat flux 
on the surface and a reduction in the flame length [11]. Thus, the effect on the flame characteristics and the spread 
rate, of reducing the ambient pressure is similar to that of reducing the flow velocity since it also increases the 
boundary layer thickness and in turn the flame stand-off distance. This is relevant because in a high-altitude location 
or in an aircraft for example, the ambient pressure will be lower than at sea level. In the case of a spacecraft such as 
the International Space Station the cabin environment may be quite different, although the ambient pressure is 
approximately that of standard Earth, it includes microgravity, low velocity flows induced by the spacecraft 
ventilation. This low velocity flows encountered in a spacecraft are on the order of ~10–20 cm/s and cannot be easily 
replicated on earth because the buoyant flow (~40 cm/s) dominates over the forced flow, making flammability testing 
of materials in spacecraft conditions even harder. 
 
 
Several studies have been conducted on the spread of flames over solid fuels under reduced pressure to observe 
the effect of buoyancy on flame spread in reduced gravity [12–16], flame spread in a high-altitude location [17–19], 
and limiting condition for flame spread [20,21]. However, there is still a need to systematically study and understand 
the effect of pressure, and consequently buoyancy, on the spread of flame over different solid combustible materials. 
In this regard, the development of numerical models that can facilitate the understanding of the processes involved 
and guide experimental research on earth is a very important useful tool. Theoretical and numerical analyses that 
 
Figure 1: Upward/Concurrent flame spread diagram. 

=== PAGE 3 ===
 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
3
describe the flame spread behavior over solid fuels must handle the complexity of the entire process by coupling the 
gas phase and solid phase reactions involved. Computational fluid dynamic models usually rely in representative 
thermochemical and kinetic parameters, as well as material properties that are not readily available for most 
engineering materials. Nevertheless, despite the restrictions and complications, numerical models are actively being 
used to complement experimental work. Several models have been developed to simulate burning of thermally thin 
[10,22–26] and thick solids [27–29]. Most of these previous works have used one-step global reactions for the gas 
phase reactions while considering different models for the solid decomposition, ranging in complexity from one-step 
thermal decomposition models [25,26,28–30] to some more complex pyrolysis models that include the formation of 
char or other intermediate components [24,31–33].  
The overall objective of this work is to determine the effect of ambient pressure, and consequently buoyancy, on 
the upward/concurrent flame spread process over a thin cotton fabric in low velocity air flows through numerical 
simulations. The material has been selected because it is common clothing material, and also it will be one of the 
materials that will be tested in the microgravity experiments to be conducted during NASA's Spacecraft Fire 
Experiment (Saffire), on board of the Orbital Corporation Cygnus spacecraft [14]. The range of ambient pressures and 
reduced gravity levels has been selected to cover a wide range of environments and buoyantly induced gas flow 
velocities. Based on previous analytical models [15,34], we hypothesize that transport processes are dominant in 
determining the upward/concurrent flame spread rates on thin materials. The specific objective of the research 
presented is to compare numerical simulations to previous analytical models, improving the current understanding of 
the causes behind the decreasing flame spread rate under reduced buoyant flows (i.e. gravity and pressure). Through 
different numerical simulations, this analysis will help elucidate the relative importance between hydrodynamics, heat 
transport or chemical kinetics, and under what conditions certain processes will prevail over others. 
II. Model Description 
The numerical model is a two-dimensional simulation of the experiment done using the Fire Dynamics Simulator 
(FDS) [35] version 6.7.0. The computational domain is 100 mm in the z-direction and 60 mm in the x-direction, as 
shown in Fig. 2. A grid sensitivity analysis was carried for cells with sizes varying from 0.8 to 0.25 mm in both 
directions. This grid dependence analysis was performed at the highest gravity (1g – earth gravity) and ambient 
pressure (100 kPa) considered as part of this study, where the gas reaction and the buoyancy effects on the flow are 
expected to be strongest. A cell size of 0.4 mm in the z-direction and the x-direction was chosen to be used for the 
solid and the gas phase in all simulations, providing adequate results for the range of pressure analyzed (changes to a 
smaller grid varied the predicted flame spread rate less than 2% from the one obtained at the selected grid value). This 
cell size was obtained from uniformly dividing the total domain in 250 cells in the z-direction and 150 cells in the x-
direction. Following the findings of Fereres et al. [28] that the level of grid refinement necessary for grid insensitivity 
varies with ambient pressure, requiring larger grid sizes at lower ambient pressure, the same grid size was used for all 
the conditions tested.  
The +z and the x+ domain were established as an outlet with an “open” boundary condition. This “open” condition 
is defined by FDS as a passive opening on the exterior boundary of the computational field that allows flow into or 
out of the domain depending on the local pressure gradient [35]. An inlet boundary condition was defined on the -z of 
the domain to give a constant forced flow of 20 cm/s, similar to the forced flow used in the experiments. The inlet 
flow is a nitrogen/oxygen mixture with the oxygen concentration of normal air (21% by vol.) at a prescribed ambient 
temperature (20 °C) and pressure; the ambient pressure is varied depending on the test being simulated. 
The sample is modeled as a thin vertical solid located on the -x coordinate of the domain and represented by an 
obstruction of 2 cell thick. The fuel used is cotton and the sample thickness is 0.3 mm (value considered for all heat 
transfer calculations).  The model is set to burn the material in an upward configuration of flame spread so, during the 
simulations, gravity is set in the -z direction and its value modified from terrestrial 9.81 m/s2 to microgravity. An 
igniter is modeled as a solid block 1 cell thick by 3 cell long at a constant temperature of 2500 °C. The igniter is 
positioned in direct contact with the solid fuel 3 mm downstream from the sample leading edge, aiming to replicate 
the igniter wire woven in the cotton fabric during the experiments. Multiple devices are positioned on the sample 
surface and further in the domain to facilitate tracking of temperature, heat flux, burning rate, and flow velocity.   
The physical properties and kinetic parameters for cotton are based on reported data for cellulose, which is 
representative of the primary composition of cotton. The thermo-physical property values for cotton are assumed 
constant and as follows: k=0.0552 W/mK, ρ=417 kg/m3, and cp=1380 J/kgK [26]. The solid fuel emissivity was set to 
ε = 0.9. The solid phase decomposition is modeled with a first order Arrhenius reaction. Although cotton is a charring 

=== PAGE 4 ===
 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
4
material, for a first approximation, the pyrolysis product is assumed to be 100% monomer with no residue yield. 
Oxidative pyrolysis is not included.  
 
For the gas phase kinetic reactions, two different 
approaches 
are 
considered 
independently 
and 
compared. Firstly, a single step, mixing-controlled 
chemical reaction (mixture-fraction based combustion 
model) to simulate infinitely fast kinetics, meaning that 
the reaction rate is only limited by species 
concentration. Secondly, a finite rate kinetic model 
defined by a single-step second order Arrhenius 
reaction using the following kinetic parameters [26]: 
Asolid=1E10 
1/s, 
 
Esolid=125 
kJ/mol, 
heat 
of 
combustion=16.7 MJ/kg, Agas=2.61E13 cm3/mol/s, and 
Egas=113 kJ/mol. In both cases, the products (CO2, H2O) 
are lumped into a single species to reduce 
computational time. 
In the work presented here the hydrodynamic 
problem is calculated through the DNS mode, which 
calculates the heat (convection) & mass (diffusion) 
transfer 
directly, 
not 
through 
semi-empirical 
correlations and two  kinetic models where used: 
infinitely fast chemistry and finite rate chemistry, to 
evaluate situations when chemistry may be slower or comparable to transport processes (i.e. low pressure). Radiation 
heat transfer is included in the model by using the FDS radiation solver which solves the radiation transport equation 
(RTE) considering a gray gas model for the radiation absorption coefficient. 
Simulations are initiated by setting up the igniter to 2500 °C and allowing it to locally heat the sample for the 
corresponding ignition time. This ignition time is varied linearly with pressure following the experiments (between 3 
and 10 s for ambient pressured ranging from 100 to 30 kPa, respectively). However, the ignition time had  
After this time, the igniter is turned off, a diffusion flame is formed, and its subsequent propagation over the entire 
solid surface is observed. The simulations run over 20 s of experiment, more than enough time for the flame to 
propagate over the entire length of the sample, even at the lower ambient pressures and different gravity levels 
considered. 
III. Results 
A. Pyrolysis Front and Spread Rate Calculations 
 
These numerical results are compared to experiments from Ref. [34]. The primary data collected during the 
experiments were the evolution of the pyrolysis front and burnout front positions (Fig. 3) over time for the different 
ambient pressures tested. Representative frames with the flame spreading over the cotton sample during a test are 
shown in Fig. 3 (left and center). Figure 3 (left) shows a frame with a strobe light on showing the pyrolysis front as a 
reference. Experimentally, the position of the pyrolysis front was defined as the point where the fabric is first visibly 
blackened as it propagates over the material. Figure 3 (center) presents a frame with the light off and shows the flame 
burnout front as well some cotton residue smoldering after the passing of the flame. Experimentally, the burnout front 
position was defined as the upstream edge of the flame, which coincides with where the flame begins receding. During 
each test, after ignition is achieved, the flame spreads uniformly along the surface of the sample. Usually, after the 
ignition of the sample, as the flame spreads over the fabric it consumes most of the cotton, leaving behind some 
smoldering cotton residue (bottom of Fig. 3 (center)) that eventually burns out most of the fabric. As ambient pressure 
was reduced, ignition of the sample was more difficult, and, in occasions, part of the cotton fabric would be left 
unburnt.  
In the FDS simulations, the pyrolysis front position is determined by tracking the solid surface temperature 
corresponding to the solid material’s pyrolysis temperature which is selected as  (𝑇𝑝= 350°𝐶 [36]). Flame burnout 
front is determined in the FDS simulations similarly as in the experiments, by tracking the position of the flame when 
 
Figure 2: Schematic illustration of model domain. 

=== PAGE 5 ===
 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
5
it starts receding from the surface. Here the receding position is verified by Heat Release Rate (HRR) measurements 
and solid surface temperature measurements. The evolution of the pyrolysis front as a function of time is commonly 
used to determine flame spread rate. From the tracking of the position of the pyrolysis front, an average flame spread 
rate can be determined as a function of relevant ambient parameters (gravity level, pressure, forced flow velocity, 
etc.). Because of the acceleratory characteristics of the upward flame spread, an averaged spread rate over the last 
portion of the sample (e.g. last 50% of the sample surface) is presented to minimize transient effects.  
 
 
B. Effect of Reduced Ambient Pressure  
 
Figure 4 shows a series of snapshots for both the simulation results and the experiments. Figure 4 (top and middle) 
row shows the heat released rate (HRR) per unit volume, which is proportional to the reaction rate, for cases with 
different kinetic models in air at different ambient pressure. Each image also includes the corresponding time stamp 
at which the snapshot was taken. As mentioned before, all simulations presented here are generated using the DNS 
mode. There are some clear differences in between the flames generated with infinitely fast chemistry and with finite 
rate chemistry. In the first case, when infinitely fast chemistry is assumed, it is expected that combustion will happen 
as soon as the flammable mixture is formed and, thus, the reaction is controlled only by the transport and mixing 
process of the fuel and oxidizer. In the second case, when a finite rate chemistry is considered, the model relies on the 
reaction rate following an Arrhenius reaction calculated from the kinetic parameters previously defined. From the 
results shown in Fig. 4 (top and middle) it is seen that chemistry is not expected to play a role at high pressures (~100 
kPa) since the flame propagation and burning process is mainly controlled by heat and mass transport, thus little 
differences between the two cases are observed. However, as pressure is reduced from 100 kPa to 30 kPa, the chemistry 
starts to play an increasingly important role showing a lower HRR for both cases considered. Furthermore, with the 
kinetic parameters considered, the finite rate chemistry model leads to blow-off after the flame gets away from the 
igniter at 50 kPa, and eventually no-propagation at 30 kPa. However, the experiments performed at 30 kPa still showed 
flame propagation, which indicates the kinetics are not well representing the case at very low pressures. 
Figure 4 (bottom) shows snapshots of experiments performed at similar conditions of ambient pressure. Flames 
spread visibly slower as pressure is reduced. Interestingly, it is seen that experimentally as the ambient pressure is 
reduced the flame characteristics are also affected, becoming less turbulent and with its intensity reduced. As pressure 
is reduced, visible flame height is also affected, becoming shorter at lower pressures. 
Further analysis of the model results shown in Fig. 4 suggests that as pressure decreases, the HRR level (related 
to flame intensity) throughout the flame is also decreased. This is true for both fast and finite rate chemistry, although 
it is much clearer in the finite rate chemistry case (middle row). On the other hand, the distance from the flame to the 
solid surface does not seem visibly affected by the decrease in ambient pressure, regardless of the kinetic model, if far 
away from extinction conditions. These results seem to indicate that, in the FDS simulations, the reduction in flame 
spread rate with decreasing ambient pressure can be mainly attributed to a decrease in HRR. The decrease in HRR 
 
Figure 3: Schematics showing representative measurements for the experiments (left and middle side) and 
the FDS simulations (right side). 

=== PAGE 6 ===
 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
6
would reduce the heat flux that the flame transfers to the solid surface, establishing a reduced heat transfer feed-back 
loop until extinction conditions appear.  
 
 
 
Figure 5 shows a comparison of the progress of the pyrolysis front and burnout front positions for three different 
ambient pressures for both the FDS simulation results with infinitely fast chemistry and the experimental data. It is 
seen that, in spite of the simplifications included in the model, the simulations are able to qualitatively reproduce the 
overall behavior observed during the experiments: at lower ambient pressures the  time evolution of the pyrolysis front 
and burnout front positions over the sample length  is slower, i.e. the flame spread rate is reduced. It is also seen that 
the average total burn time for the experiments is larger than the one obtained for the simulations at all ambient 
pressures tested. In the simulations, the reaction is initiated immediately as the igniter object is at a very high 
temperature from the beginning, whereas experimentally, the flame spread process takes longer to start due to the 
effect of the heating up of the igniter and the sample at the different pressure conditions. These differences observed 
suggest that the ignition process might not be entirely captured, causing larger differences at the beginning of the 
spread. 
 
Figure 4: Comparison of FDS simulation results for heat release rate (HRR) of a spreading flame under 
different ambient pressures and gas phase chemistry with experimental snapshots. Top row corresponds to 
scenarios using infinitely fast chemical reactions, middle row shows cases using finite rate chemistry for the gas 
phase, and bottom row shows experimental snapshots. All cases correspond to an external 20 cm/s forced flow, normal 
gravity 9.81 m/s2 and 21% O2 concentration. 

=== PAGE 7 ===
 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
7
 
 
The pyrolysis front data from Figure 5 (a) is used to determine the flame spread rates. Figure 6 shows average 
flame spread rate obtained as a function of ambient pressure for both the experiments and the FDS simulations. 
Because of the size of the samples, and the accelerative characteristics of the flame, an averaged spread rate over the 
last 50% of the sample is presented so that the data are closer to the steady state value and transient effects are 
minimized, as explained in section A. Experimental and numerical flame spread rates decrease with ambient pressure, 
although only the results obtained with DNS and infinitely fast kinetics seem to agree well in terms of order of 
magnitude. From the results, it is seen that the simulations performed using finite rate chemistry underpredict the 
experimental spread rates at the higher pressures, while not even allowing flame spread at the lower pressure 
environments. This underprediction of the experimental data is likely associated with the selection of the chemical 
parameters chosen for the model and the differences that could exist between cellulose and the cotton fabric. It should 
be noted that under this condition only partial burning of the sample near the igniter region was observed in the FDS 
simulations done at 50 kPa, and the flame would eventually blow off about 11 mm away from the igniter, thus no 
spread rate was determined for that condition due to the very short propagation length.  
Looking to decrease the effect of ambient pressure on the simplified global one step Arrhenius reaction rate, in 
Ref. [37] different approaches were taken, looking into changes of the pre-exponential factor and the activation energy 
values as well as changes in the reaction order. As part of the sensitivity analysis performed in Ref. [37] the authors 
found that a decrease in the activation energy (Egas) of about 4% increased the flame spread rate in about 0.8%, while 
an increase in the pre-exponential factor (Agas) of about 50% only increased the flame spread rate in less than 1.4% 
affecting in both cases very little the flame spread rate observed. Additional results presented also in Ref. [37] showed 
that decreasing the order from 2 to 1 described the experimental results very well. This indicates that different 
pathways are able to reach the same experimental behavior: either using infinitely fast chemistry or with an appropriate 
(reduced) reaction order. The implications are varied. If conditions are far from extinction, it can be assumed that 
kinetic effects are non-dominant and can be neglected in a first order analysis. As hypothesized, transport processes 
determine the spread rates. Thus, the rest of the study will focus on infinitely fast chemistry for simplicity. This 
assumption will not hold near extinction conditions.  
As the flame spreads over the solid surface there are multiple complex mechanisms that involve the interaction 
between the solid phase (heat transfer, thermal decomposition, gasification) and the gas phase (transport, mixing, 
chemical kinetics) [1–3]. Depending of the conditions, some of these mechanisms can be more or less relevant for the 
general process. The following results are only presented for simulations using DNS with infinitely fast gas phase 
kinetics, because they show good agreement with the experimental results. 
 
Figure 5:  Comparison of the time evolution of the (a) pyrolysis front position and (b) burnout front position of
FDS simulations with infinitely fast chemistry and experimental data. The shaded area in the experimental 
data represents the variability of the experiments. 

=== PAGE 8 ===
 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
8
In the past, reduced pressure environments 
have been proposed as an opportunity to 
replicate the low buoyancy environment 
encountered in partial or reduced gravity 
[13,15,38]. The reasoning behind this relies in 
the similarities between the flames observed 
under both conditions in terms of flame 
appearance/luminosity and reduced spread 
rate. Figure 7 shows the average flame spread 
rate results obtained from the simulations at 
different ambient pressures and at different 
gravity levels. In both cases, when ambient 
pressure or gravity level are reduced, flame 
spread rate is decreased. This agrees with the 
experiments at 1 g at a range of sub 
atmospheric pressures (as shown in Fig. 7) and 
with  Saffire experiments for microgravity 
[39]. Saffire experiments correspond to Sibal, a 
cotton-fiberglass composite material, and not 
pure cotton as the experiments and model 
presented here. Therefore, one can expect a 
reduced flame spread rate in the Saffire 
experiments compared to cotton. From the 
figure, it is seen that as ambient pressure is 
reduced, the flame spread rate over the solid 
approaches that obtained at standard ambient 
pressure (100 kPa) in reduced gravity. A 
reduction in ambient pressure to 33 kPa results 
in similar flame spread rates as those observed 
in microgravity. These results indicate that 
concurrent flame spread in low pressure and 
normal 
gravity, 
may 
have 
similar 
characteristics as those in reduced gravity. It 
should be kept in mind however, that the total 
pressure reduction necessary to see these 
similarities will vary depending of the material 
characteristics as well as other environmental 
conditions.  
 Another important parameter for concurrent 
flame spread is the pyrolysis length because it 
can be directly related to the flame size/height 
and the portion of the material that is burning 
as the flame spreads. Furthermore, the 
pyrolysis length can be correlated to the heat that is transferred from the flame to the solid. Experimentally, this 
pyrolysis length is obtained by subtracting the burnout front position from the pyrolysis front position. In the 
simulation results, the pyrolysis length is determined similarly, by subtracting the burnout front position from the 
pyrolysis front position. Because of the accelerative characteristic of the spread process, the pyrolysis length is 
obtained toward the end of the test when it is closest to steady state. Figure 8 shows simultaneously pyrolysis length 
measurements for both the experiments and the simulation results. The experiments and the FDS simulations show a 
similar trend, with the pyrolysis length decreasing with decreasing ambient pressure and gravity level. It is also 
interesting to see that the pyrolysis length seems to be more sensitive to changes in gravity than to ambient pressure. 
From these results it can be inferred that, despite the pyrolysis front spreading at similar rates between reduced gravity 
and reduced pressure conditions, the burnout front seems to spread significantly slower in reduced pressure 
environment that in reduced gravity conditions. In other words, the area affected by the flame preheating and 
pyrolyzing the solid surface is more sensitive to reductions in gravity. As a result, even though the flame spread rate 
 
Figure 6: Comparison of simulated flame spread rates with 
experiments. Average flame spread rate measurements obtained 
from the FDS simulations as a function of ambient pressure for 
different kinetic models. 
 
Figure 7: Average flame spread rate measurements and
simulations as a function of ambient pressure on cotton fabric.
Simulations at 1 g for a range of pressures and at 100 kPa and 0g are 
included. Microgravity experiments obtained during the Saffire II test
[39] for another cotton-based fabric (Sibal) are included in here for 
reference. 

=== PAGE 9 ===
 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
9
is comparable between these conditions (see Fig. 7), bigger differences arise when looking into the pyrolysis length 
or flame height measurements. 
 
 
C. Effect of reduced ambient gravity 
 
The results of Fig. 7 agree with the hypothesis that suggest that reduced pressure can be used to replicate the flame 
spread behavior observed at reduced gravity level. Continuing with this analysis, different gravity levels are also 
simulated using FDS to explore the similarities and differences between reduced pressure and gravity. Fig. 9 shows 
the average flame spread rate obtained from the FDS simulations at normal ambient pressure, i.e. 100 kPa, for different 
gravity levels. As a comparison, the experimental data obtained in 1g at different ambient pressures and that of Saffire 
in microgravity are also included. It is seen that as the gravity level is reduced the flame spread rate follows a linear 
trend, similar to what was observed when reducing ambient pressure (experimentally and through the simulations). It 
is also seen that flame spread rates obtained at different gravity levels could be comparable to those obtained at 
different ambient pressures. In such a case, flame spread rates under lunar gravity (0.17g) could be replicated by a 
reduction in ambient pressure to 46 kPa, and flame spread rate in a martian gravity (0.38g) would be similar to that 
encountered at 54 kPa. 
 
 
Figure 8: Pyrolysis length measurements and simulations as a function of ambient pressure. Simulations at 1 g 
for a range of pressures and at 100 kPa and 0g are included. Microgravity experiments obtained during Saffire II test
[39] for another cotton-based fabric (Sibal) are included in here for reference. 
 
Figure 9: Average flame spread rate measurements as a function of gravity level. Microgravity experiments 
obtained during Saffire II test [39] for another cotton based fabric (Sibal) are included in here for reference. 

=== PAGE 10 ===
 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
10 
It is broadly accepted that flame spread reduces at lower pressures. However, the explanations behind this 
observation may be challenged. As presented in Ref. [15,34] at the lower pressures the flame spread rate is expected 
to be reduced because of a thickening in both the hydrodynamic and thermal boundary layers, moving the flame further 
away from the solid surface and consequently reducing the convective heating from the flame to the solid. Figure 10 
corroborates this explanation when reduced buoyancy is due to a reduced gravity level, as seen from a) 100 kPa 1 g 
(left) to e) 100 kPa ug (right), where the boundary layer thickness at mid-sample (50 mm high) increases approximately 
40%. However, analysis of Fig. 4 top row indicates that as pressure is reduced, the boundary layer thickness is not 
greatly affected. In fact, the FDS simulations results presented in Fig. 4 suggest that the reason for a decreased flame 
spread rate at low pressures may be related to a lower HRR rather than to a change in the thermal boundary layer 
geometry or flame stand-off distance. This is further explained considering that FDS determines the HRR by summing 
the species mass production rates times the respective heats of formation as: 
 
𝑞̇′′′ = −∑𝑚̇𝛼
′′′∆ℎ𝑓,𝛼
0
𝛼
 
(1) 
 
or more generally as 
 
𝑞̇′′′ = 𝜌∑(𝑌̃𝛼(𝛿𝑡) −𝑌̃𝛼
0)∆ℎ𝑓,𝛼
0
𝛼
 
(2) 
 
where 𝑞̇′′′ is the HRR per unit volume, 𝑚̇𝛼
′′′ is the mass production time of 𝛼, ∆ℎ𝑓,𝛼
0 is the heat of formation of specie 
𝛼, 𝑌̃𝛼(𝛿𝑡) is the cell mean mass fraction at the end of the time step 𝛿𝑡, 𝑌̃𝛼
0 is the initial cell mean mass fraction of 
species 𝛼, and 𝜌 is the gas phase density. Eq. (2) shows a clear dependence on density, which in turn is dependent on 
ambient pressure following the equation of state (𝑃= 𝜌𝑇𝑅/𝑊), explaining then the reduction of HRR with ambient 
pressure. The variations in the HRR with ambient pressure are of importance because they can explain the reduction 
in the flame spread rates obtained with minimal change of the boundary layer thickness. These results may indicate 
another aspect in which reduced buoyant flows (gravity and pressure) may differ and caution should be exercised 
when extrapolating results from one to the other condition. This is also highlighted by the greater differences seen in 
the pyrolysis length shown in Fig. 8, where cotton modeling results or experiments for Sibal (Saffire -II) for 
microgravity appear significantly lower than any low pressure case tested or simulated at 1 g.  
 
 
 
To gather more insight into the heat transfer in these two similar reduced buoyancy situations, the convective and 
radiative heat flux on the solid surface are shown in Fig. 11. The data presented in Fig. 11 shows the evolution over 
time of heat flux measurements from devices positioned 50 mm from the bottom edge of the sample. Notice the initial 
 
Figure 10: FDS simulation results showing heat release rate (HRR) of a spreading flame under different gravity 
levels. Time stamps show the instant the flame front reaches 33 mm. Oxygen concentration is 21%, external forced 
flow velocity is 20 cm/s. 

=== PAGE 11 ===
 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
11 
noise registered by the devices initially when the igniter is on and the flame is stabilizing over the surface. Also, at 
each of the conditions a different peak measurement is recorded when the upstream leading edge of the flame (burnout 
front) passes over the device. From the figure it is seen that at FDS confirms that, for concurrent flame spread, the 
process is mainly controlled by convective heating of the surface as the flame spreads over it. In all cases, whether its 
reduced pressure (top row) or gravity level (bottom row) the convective heat flux is an order of magnitude larger than 
the radiative heat flux. It is seen that as the pressure (top row) and gravity level (bottom row) are reduced 
independently, the convective heat flux to the solid surface is also reduced, particularly during the initial preheating 
of the material, causing a slower heating of the solid surface and a slower propagation rate. Furthermore, it is also 
seen that particularly at as pressure or gravity are reduced, radiative heat transfer effects become more significant in 
magnitude when compared to convective effects. An interesting difference shown by the heat flux profiles at low 
pressure and at low gravity is that, despite having similar average flame spread rates, the conditions at low pressure 
in 1g and 100 kPa in low gravity exhibit very different profiles, particularly at the end of the spread. This is related to 
fact that in FDS the burnout front seems to spread significantly slower in reduced pressure environment that in reduced 
gravity conditions. 
 
IV. Conclusion 
The concurrent flame spread rate over a thin cotton fabric has been studied under reduced ambient pressure and 
gravity levels using numerical simulations performed with FDS to better understand the effect of this environmental 
variable on the flame spread process.  
Figure 11: FDS simulation results for HRR by convection (left) and radiation (right) at different pressures (top) 
and different gravity levels (bottom). All correspond to devices positioned 50 mm from the bottom boundary.
Vertical peaks correspond to the flame burnout front passing by this location. 

=== PAGE 12 ===
 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
12 
The results show that as pressure is reduced, the flame spread rate over the cotton fabric is also reduced, as observed 
with other fuels. FDS simulations show that at higher ambient pressures the chemistry does not play a significant role 
and the process is mainly controlled by convective heat transfer mechanisms. The simulation results suggest that 
reducing the pressure decreases the HRR from the flame to the solid surface due to a reduction in convective heat flux 
at low pressures. However, the flame stand-off distance seems relatively insensitive to ambient pressure. As ambient 
pressure is further reduced, the resolution of the chemistry model can become a key factor in the definition of the 
spread rate and controlling extinction. Decoupling chemical effects from heat transfer effects shows that the chemical 
kinetic parameters selected are particularly important at lower ambient pressure environments where, if a detailed 
finite rate model is used, no propagation is observed.  
Furthermore, the analysis of the FDS simulation results suggest that as gravity levels are reduced, flame spread 
rates also decrease but the explanation behind this observation seems different. As gravity levels are lowered, the 
convective heat flux on the sample surface is reduced (as with lower pressure). This reduction in convective heat flux 
is accompanied by a visible enlargement of the boundary layer thickness, leading to a much lower flame spread rate 
as a result of the superposition of both effects. This agrees with previous analytical studies, that predicted a reduced 
buoyant flow would have these effects but highlights the differences between reducing gravity or ambient pressure.  
Acknowledgments 
This research is supported by NASA Grant NNX12AN67A. The authors would like to thank Saul Pacheco, Grace 
Mendoza, Runbiao Wei, Ryan So, Mina Fanaian, and Madison Hales for their contributions conducting the 
experiments. 
References 
[1] 
F.A. Williams, Mechanisms of fire spread, Symp. Combust. 16 (1976) 1281–1294. doi:10.1016/S0082-0784(77)80415-3. 
[2] 
J.G. Quintiere, Fundamentals of Fire Phenomena, Wiley, 2006. 
[3] 
C. Fernandez-Pello, The solid phase, in: G. Cox (Ed.), Combust. Fundam. Fire, Academic Press Limited, 1994: pp. 31–
100. 
[4] 
G.H. Markstein, J.N. de Ris, Upward fire spread over textiles, Symp. Combust. 14 (1973) 1085–1097. 
[5] 
M. Sibulkin, J. Kim, The dependence of flame propagation on surface heat transfer II. upward burning, Combust. Sci. 
Technol. 17 (1977) 39–49. doi:10.1080/00102209708946811. 
[6] 
A.C. Fernandez-Pello, Flame spread in a forward forced flow, Combust. Flame. 36 (1979) 63–78. doi:10.1016/0010-
2180(79)90046-4. 
[7] 
H.T. Loh, C. Fernandez-Pello, A study of the controlling mechanisms of flow assisted flame spread, Twent. Symp. 
Combust. Combust. Inst. (1984) 1575–1582. 
[8] 
H.T. Loh, A.C. Fernandez-Pello, Flow Assisted Flame Spread over Thermally Thin Fuels, Fire Saf. Sci. 1 (1986) 65–74. 
http://www.iafss.org/publications/fss/1/65. 
[9] 
C.K. Law, S.H. Chung, N. Srinivasan, Gas-phase quasi-steadiness and fuel vapor accumulation effects in droplet burning, 
Combust. Flame. 38 (1980) 173–198. doi:10.1016/0010-2180(80)90049-8. 
[10] 
C. Li, Y.T.T. Liao, J.S. T’Ien, D.L. Urban, P. Ferkul, S. Olson, G.A. Ruff, J. Easton, Transient flame growth and spread 
processes over a large solid fabric in concurrent low-speed flows in microgravity - Model versus experiment, Proc. 
Combust. Inst. 37 (2019) 4163–4171. doi:10.1016/j.proci.2018.05.168. 
[11] 
A.C. Fernandez-Pello, A theoretical model for the upward laminar spread of flames over vertical fuel surfaces, Combust. 
Flame. 31 (1978) 135–148. doi:10.1016/0010-2180(78)90124-4. 
[12] 
P. V. Ferkul, J.S. T’ien, A model of low-speed concurrent flow flame spread over a thin fuel, Combust. Sci. Technol. 99 
(1994) 345–370. doi:10.1080/00102209408935440. 
[13] 
J. Kleinhenz, I.I. Feier, S.Y. Hsu, J.S. T’ien, P. V. Ferkul, K.R. Sacksteder, Pressure modeling of upward flame spread 
and 
burning 
rates 
over 
solids 
in 
partial 
gravity, 
Combust. 
Flame. 
154 
(2008) 
637–643. 
doi:10.1016/j.combustflame.2008.05.023. 
[14] 
G. Jomaas, J.L. Torero, C. Eigenbrod, J. Niehaus, S.L. Olson, P. V Ferkul, G. Legros, A.C. Fernandez-Pello, A.J. Cowlard, 
S. Rouvreau, N. Smirnov, O. Fujita, J.S. T’ien, G.A. Ruff, D.L. Urban, Fire safety in space – beyond flammability testing 
of small samples, Acta Astronaut. 109 (2015) 208–216. doi:10.1016/j.actaastro.2014.11.025. 
[15] 
M. Thomsen, C. Fernandez-pello, D.L. Urban, G.A. Ruff, S.L. Olson, On simulating concurrent flame spread in reduced 
gravity by reducing ambient pressure, Proc. Combust. Inst. 37 (2019) 3793–3800. 
[16] 
Y. Nakamura, N. Yoshimura, T. Matsumura, H. Ito, O. Fujita, Flame Spread over Polymer-Insulated Wire in Sub-
Atmospheric Pressure : Similarity to Microgravity Phenomena, Prog. Scale Model. (2008) 17–27. doi:10.1007/978-1-
4020-8682-3_2. 
[17] 
Y. Zhang, X. Huang, Q. Wang, J. Ji, J. Sun, Y. Yin, Experimental study on the characteristics of horizontal flame spread 
over XPS surface on plateau, J. Hazard. Mater. 189 (2011) 34–39. doi:10.1016/j.jhazmat.2011.01.101. 

=== PAGE 13 ===
 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
13 
[18] 
J. Gong, L. Yang, X. Zhou, Z. Deng, G. Lei, W. Wang, Effects of low atmospheric pressure on combustion characteristics 
of polyethylene and polymethyl methacrylate, J. Fire Sci. 30 (2012) 224–239. doi:10.1177/0734904111431863. 
[19] 
J. Gong, X. Zhou, Z. Deng, L. Yang, Influences of low atmospheric pressure on downward flame spread over thick PMMA 
slabs at different altitudes, Int. J. Heat Mass Transf. 61 (2013) 191–200. doi:10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2013.01.066. 
[20] 
A.F. Osorio, C. Fernandez-Pello, D.L. Urban, G.A. Ruff, Limiting conditions for flame spread in fire resistant fabrics, 
Proc. Combust. Inst. 34 (2013) 2691–2697. doi:10.1016/j.proci.2012.07.053. 
[21] 
M. Thomsen, D.C. Murphy, C. Fernandez-Pello, D.L. Urban, G.A. Ruff, Flame spread limits (LOC) of fire resistant 
fabrics, Fire Saf. J. 91 (2017) 259–265. doi:10.1016/j.firesaf.2017.03.072. 
[22] 
C. Lautenberger, G. Rein, C. Fernandez-Pello, The application of a genetic algorithm to estimate material properties for 
fire modeling from bench-scale fire test data, Fire Saf. J. 41 (2006) 204–214. doi:10.1016/j.firesaf.2005.12.004. 
[23] 
A. Kumar, H.Y. Shih, J.S. T’ien, A comparison of extinction limits and spreading rates in opposed and concurrent 
spreading flames over thin solids, Combust. Flame. 132 (2003) 667–677. doi:10.1016/S0010-2180(02)00516-3. 
[24] 
C. Li, Y.T.T. Liao, Numerical investigation of flame splitting phenomenon in upward flame spread over solids with a two-
stage pyrolysis model, Combust. Sci. Technol. 190 (2018) 2082–2096. doi:10.1080/00102202.2018.1489380. 
[25] 
X. Zhao, J.S. T’ien, A three-dimensional transient model for flame growth and extinction in concurrent flows, Combust. 
Flame. 162 (2015) 1829–1839. doi:10.1016/j.combustflame.2014.12.003. 
[26] 
Y.T.T. Liao, J.S. T’ien, A numerical simulation of transient ignition and ignition limit of a composite solid by a localised 
radiant source, Combust. Theory Model. 17 (2013) 1096–1124. doi:10.1080/13647830.2013.831486. 
[27] 
C. Lautenberger, S. Mcallister, D. Rich, C. Fernandez-pello, Effect of Environmental Variables on Flame Spread Rates in 
Microgravity, 45th Int. Conf. Environ. Syst. (2007) 1–11. doi:10.2514/6.2007-383. 
[28] 
S. Fereres, C. Lautenberger, A.C. Fernandez-Pello, D.L. Urban, G.A. Ruff, Understanding ambient pressure effects on 
piloted 
ignition 
through 
numerical 
modeling, 
Combust. 
Flame. 
159 
(2012) 
3544–3553. 
doi:10.1016/j.combustflame.2012.08.006. 
[29] 
J.W. Kwon, N.A. Dembsey, C.W. Lautenberger, Evaluation of FDS V.4: Upward flame spread, Fire Technol. 43 (2007) 
255–284. doi:10.1007/s10694-007-0020-x. 
[30] 
H.Y. Shih, J.S. T’ien, A three-dimensional model of steady flame spread over a thin solid in low-speed concurrent flows, 
Combust. Theory Model. 7 (2003) 677–704. doi:10.1088/1364-7830/7/4/005. 
[31] 
T. Kashiwagi, K.B. McGrattan, S.L. Olson, O. Fujita, M. Kikuchi, K. Ito, Effects of Slow Wind on Localized Radiative 
Ignition and Transition To Flame Spread in Microgravity, Symp. Combust. 26 (1996) 1345–1352. 
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0082-0784(96)80353-5. 
[32] 
C.W. Lautenberger, Y.Y. Zhou, A.C. Fernandez-Pello, Numerical modeling of convective effects on piloted ignition of 
composite materials, Combust. Sci. Technol. 177 (2005) 1231–1252. doi:10.1080/00102200590927058. 
[33] 
G. Rein, C. Lautenberger, A.C. Fernandez-Pello, J.L. Torero, D.L. Urban, Application of genetic algorithms and 
thermogravimetry to determine the kinetics of polyurethane foam in smoldering combustion, Combust. Flame. 146 (2006) 
95–108. doi:10.1016/j.combustflame.2006.04.013. 
[34] 
M. Thomsen, C. Fernandez-pello, G.A. Ruff, D.L. Urban, Upward-Concurrent Flame Spread over a Thin Cotton Fabric : 
The Effect of Ambient Pressure, Proc. Nineth Int. Semin. Fire Explos. Hazards. (2019). 
[35] 
K. McGrattan, S. Hostikka, R. McDermott, J. Floyd, C. Weinschenk, K. Overholt, Fire Dynamics Simulator (Sixth 
Edition) User’s Guide, Gaithersburg, MD, 2016. doi:10.6028/NIST.SP.1019. 
[36] 
L. Cabrales, N. Abidi, On the thermal degradation of cellulose in cotton fibers, J. Therm. Anal. Calorim. 102 (2010) 485–
491. doi:10.1007/s10973-010-0911-9. 
[37] 
M. Thomsen, S. Fereres, C. Fernandez-pello, D.L. Urban, G.A. Ruff, Understanding the Role of Low Pressure on Upward 
Flame Spread over Thin Cotton, in: West. States Sect. Combust. Inst. - Fall Meet., 2019: pp. 1–18. 
[38] 
S.L. Olson, S.A. Gokoglu, D.L. Urban, G.A. Ruff, P. V. Ferkul, Upward flame spread in large enclosures: Flame growth 
and pressure rise, Proc. Combust. Inst. 35 (2015) 2623–2630. doi:10.1016/j.proci.2014.05.069. 
[39] 
D.L. Urban, P. Ferkul, S. Olson, G.A. Ruff, J.S. T’ien, Y.T. Liao, A.C. Fernandez-Pello, J.L. Torero, G. Legros, C. 
Eigenbrod, N. Smirnov, O. Fujita, S. Rouvreau, B. Toth, G. Jomaas, Flame Spread : Effects of Microgravity and Scale, 
Combust. Flame. 199 (2019) 168–182. doi:10.1016/j.combustflame.2018.10.012. 
 
 
