
=== PAGE 1 ===
51st International Conference on Environmental Systems 
ICES-2022-278 
10-14 July 2022, St. Paul, Minnesota 
Model Development of Large-Scale Spacecraft Fires during 
the Saffire-IV Experiments  
 
John Brooker1 and Justin Niehaus2 
NASA Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, OH 44135, USA 
 
An accidental fire can pose dire consequences to crew safety and mission success. The Saffire Project aims 
to investigate large-scale fire behavior in microgravity in order to aid in the prediction of spacecraft fires. These 
series of experiments ignite solid materials within the Northrop Grumman Cygnus vehicle after it departs from 
a resupply mission to the International Space Station. A model of the Cygnus vehicle during the Saffire-IV 
experiment was developed using the commercial software PyroSim. The cargo arranged during the descent 
phase was used for the geometry of the model. In the model, cabin air flows into the Saffire payload while heat 
and combustion species flow out of the Saffire downstream through a standoff to a bed of sensors called the 
Far Field Diagnostic. The temperature sensors near the Saffire payload were used to determine the heat 
addition rate at the outlet of Saffire, while the details of the combustion and stoichiometry are used to determine 
the species flow at the outlet. Gas measurements previously reported for the Saffire-IV experiments are 
compared against the simulation results and sources of error are discussed. 
Nomenclature 
A 
= 
Sample Area 
AP 
= 
Aft Port 
AS 
= 
Aft Starboard 
ECLSS = 
Environmental Control and Life Support System 
FDS 
= 
Fire Dynamics Simulator  
FP 
= 
Forward Port 
FS 
= 
Forward Starboard 
HAR 
= 
Heat Addition Rate 
ISS 
= 
International Space Station 
MLR 
= 
Mass Loss Rate 
NG 
= 
Northrop Grumman 
NIST 
= 
National Institute of Standards and Technology 
PMMA = 
Polymethyl Methacrylate 
SCM 
= 
Secondary Constant Mass 
SCV 
= 
Secondary Constant Volume 
RS 
= 
Remote Sensor 
SFU 
= 
Saffire Flow Unit 
SR 
= 
Spread Rate 
SIBAL = 
Solid Inflammatory Boundary at Low-Speed fabric 
 
I. Introduction 
fire inside of a spacecraft poses a catastrophic threat to crew health and mission success. Most of the fire testing 
that has been performed to design vehicles and determine material flammability limits has been performed on 
earth in 1-g or has been small in scale1,2,3,. The Saffire project aims to fill knowledge gaps of large-scale flame spread 
in microgravity. Saffire experiments have also provided opportunities to test novel gas species sensor technology in a 
realistic flight configuration, as well as a way to obtain data on the length of time to detection and detector signal level 
for a species release event in a spacecraft cabin. Five Saffire experiments have been conducted so far with one more, 
Saffire-VI, scheduled to fly in 2023. All will take place on Northrop Grumman’s (NG) Cygnus vehicle following the 
 
1 Aerospace Engineer, Low-Gravity Exploration Technology Branch, 21000 Brookpark Road, Cleveland, OH 44135. 
2 Aerospace Engineer, Low-Gravity Exploration Technology Branch, 21000 Brookpark Road, Cleveland, OH 44135. 
A

=== PAGE 2 ===
 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
2
completion of its resupply mission to the International Space Station (ISS). The experiments and data downlink take 
place during the three weeks between undocking from the ISS and burning up during destructive reentry. 
The first three Saffire experiments focused on flame spread to compare large-scale microgravity tests to previous 
small-scale and 1-g tests4-8. Saffire IV and V incorporated gas species release events and other diagnostics tools (e.g., 
far-field trace gas and particle sensors) with the aim of gaining a deeper understanding of smoke plume transport and 
combustion products on the vehicle.9,10,11. Saffire IV has various events that include a CO2 scrub, flow visualization, 
gas release and burn events. The burn events include a cotton/fiber-glass blend known as SIBAL and transparent rigid 
plastic polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA), which is often substituted for glass, such as in shatter proof windows. Far 
field diagnostics were added for measuring smoke particles and combustion products in order to assess the impact of 
fire on the vehicle, such as product mixing. Six remote sensors (RS) that measure CO2 concentration and temperature 
are also located throughout Cygnus.  
It is important to understand the impact a fire has on the vehicle and the crew. The data collected by Saffire will 
help modelers develop tools to better predict the effect of a fire on a spacecraft. This work aims to develop a model 
that can predict the burn events in Saffire IV. The model is a closed pressure chamber of the Cygnus vehicle filled 
with trash and cargo after the resupply mission of NG-13 is completed. In the model, the Saffire unit inputs ambient 
temperature cabin air and outputs hot air and species to imitate the effect of the combustion events. The heat addition 
rate (HAR) outputted by Saffire is derived using the difference between the experimentally captured inlet and outlet 
temperature of Saffire. Downstream of Saffire, near the hatch of Cygnus (zenith) is the Far Field Diagnostic (FFD), 
where particle and combustion gas sensors are located. The model compares the experimental temperature and CO2 
at the six RS locations throughout Cygnus and the FFD at the opposite end of Cygnus from Saffire.  
II. Saffire Experiment 
All Saffire experiments have taken place on the NG Cygnus vehicle after a resupply mission to the ISS. The first 
three Saffire missions focused on the large-scale flame spread in order to determine if tests conducted in 1-g and at 
smaller scales are relevant to large-scale microgravity flame tests. The next three Saffire tests share that focus, while 
extending to the smoke plume transport and the fire’s effect on the vehicle. 
Figure 1 shows a schematic of a Cygnus vehicle with Saffire and the FFD but with the cargo hidden. Cygnus is a 
pressure vessel that is approximately 4 meters in length by 3 meters in diameter. The Environmental Control and Life 
Support System (ECLSS) that circulates air throughout the cabin takes air in by the side with the FFD (zenith), and 
expels it on the side near Saffire, (nadir). 
The crew maintained a generally prescribed free-air volume in the vehicle, consisting of interconnected channels of 
approximate triangular geometry, made out of trash and cargo, which transported heat, species and smoke during the 
campaign events. This produced four triangular stand offs for the transfer of gas from nadir to zenith end cones, and 
back through the recirculation of air through the ECLSS system. 
 
Figure 1. Schematic of Saffire experiment. The Saffire payload (left) is integrated into the Cygnus vehicle (center). 
During the experiment, the effect of the fire on the vehicle is determined in part by the Far Field Diagnostic (right). 

=== PAGE 3 ===
 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
3
For context, Table 1 gives 
all the events completed 
during Saffire-IV. The test 
campaign began with a scrub 
of CO2 by pulling cabin air 
through 
the 
lithium 
hydroxide bed of the FFD. In 
event two, CO2 was released 
to determine the volume, 
which helped determine how 
much oxygen should be 
added later in the experiment. 
Hydrogen Chloride (HCl) 
was released after the oxygen 
scrub to study its adsorption 
to surfaces. HCl was also 
released during the event 4 
SIBAL burn to determine if 
adsorption changed as a 
function 
of 
temperature. 
Flow visualization tests were 
performed before and after the completion of the last burn events to determine if any major differences in air flow 
through the SFU had occurred. The PMMA in event number 5 did not extinguish when planned, causing the 
cancelation of other events. More details of the Saffire experiments are provided by Urban9. This work focuses 
specifically on the burn events, test 4 SIBAL burn and the test 5 PMMA burn. Both burns were performed at one 
atmosphere pressure, 21% O2 and with concurrent flow relative to the sample through the SFU.  
III. Modeling 
Fire Dynamics Simulator (FDS) is a large-eddy turbulent simulation tool developed by NIST for low-speed flow 
that emphasizes smoke and heat transfer from fires12. Pyrosim is the graphical interface that was used to run the 
simulations of FDS and develop the vehicle model13. Figure 2 shows the geometry of the model, highlighting Saffire 
and sensor locations. The geometry of Cygnus was built from sketches provided by NG. The post resupply cargo and 
 
Figure 2. Model of Cygnus vehicle. A) Shows the outlet of the Saffire unit, where flow moves through the forward 
port standoff where RS3 is located. RS6 is shown in the far zenith section, along with the FFD. B) The Saffire inlet 
takes in air from the aft port standoff where RS4 is located. RS1 is shown in the far nadir section.  
Table 1. Summary of Saffire-IV events. Events 7 and 8 were not completed 
due to technical and logistical issues and hence are omitted from this table.  
Event 
Number 
Description of Event 
Purpose of Event 
1 
CO2 Scrub 
Reduce background CO2, 
evaluate CO2 scrubber 
performance 
2 
CO2 and HCl release 
Track tracer gas transport 
throughout cabin  for vehicle 
volume calculation and observe 
HCl surface adsorption 
3 
Flow visualization test 
Assess SFU air flow 
4 
Burn: 40.64 cm wide × 50 cm long 
SIBAL 
Sample burn with 
concurrent HCl release 
5 
Burn: 40 cm wide × 18 cm long × 1 cm 
thick 2-sided PMMA 
Sample burn, no HCl 
release 
6 
CO2 Scrub 
Evaluate CO2 scrubber 
performance 
9 
Flow visualization test 
Assess SFU air flow 

=== PAGE 4 ===
 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
4
trash configuration were determined from crew photos. The free gas volume obtained from the model was 10.9 m3.  
This compared favorably with NG’s estimate of 11.1 m3 based on the dimensions of the packed bags.  
RS1 is located in the nadir bulkhead section of Cygnus while RS2 is in the forward starboard (FS) standoff. RS3 
can be found in the forward port (FP) standoff, which is most directly in the flow path of Saffire. RS4 is in the aft port 
(AP), RS5 is in the aft starboard (AS), and RS6 is in the far zenith end cone of Cygnus. Figure 2 highlights four of the 
RS locations in Cygnus, as well as Saffire, the FFD, and the Cygnus ECLSS system that circulates the air. Not shown 
is RS2, which is approximately in the same location as RS3 but in the FS standoff, and RS5 which is approximately 
in the same location as RS4 but in the AS standoff.  
 
Table 2 gives flow rates of interest within the model. The flow in the Saffire duct gives a nominal velocity of 20 
cm/s, but is ramped down at certain times in the burn. The initial cabin air temperature was set to 25 °C for the SIBAL 
burn and 26 °C for the PMMA burn, while a constant temperature boundary condition for the surfaces were set at       
25 °C for both burns. The heat transfer into the vehicle from Saffire was determined by the experimental Saffire inlet 
and outlet temperatures. Equation 1 gives the expression for the heat addition rate (HAR) out of Saffire where ρair is 
the air density (1.12 kg/m3), Cp is the isobaric specific heat of the air (1.02 kJ/kg-K), and V̇air is the volumetric flow 
rate of the air through Saffire, which for the vast majority of the burn is 0.028 m3/s, as given by Table 2. This method 
is the sensible enthalpy rise method highlighted by the Society of Fire Protection Engineering Handbook14. The 
specific heat at constant pressure was used due to the vehicle being pressure controlled. The maximum Saffire outlet 
temperature was 44.9 °C, which gave a ΔT of 15.4 °C for the SIBAL burn and the maximum outlet temperature for 
the PMMA burn was 87 °C for a ΔT of 57 °C. 
 
Table 2. Model flow rates 
Cygnus Location 
Flow Rate (m3/s) 
Vehicle 
0.062 
Saffire Flow Duct 
0.028 
Saffire Avionics 
0.013 
FFD 
0.017 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
             
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         (1) 
 
Figures 3 and 4 give the input parameters for the SIBAL and PMMA burn events respectively.  The HAR and SFU 
flow rate are given on the right axis, and the H2O and CO2 generation rates given on the left axis. The flow rate was 
taken from experimental output and divided into linear segments. The peak generation rate of the products is higher 
 
Figure 3. Model inputs for the SIBAL burn event. 
The CO2 and H2O Mass Generation Rates correspond 
to the left axis in blue, and the heat release rate coming 
out of Saffire, as well as the Saffire Flow Rate 
correspond to the right axis in red and black 
respectively. 
 
Figure 4. Model inputs for the PMMA burn event. 
The CO2 and H2O Mass Generation Rates correspond 
to the left axis in blue, and the heat release rate coming 
out of Saffire, as well as the Saffire Flow Rate 
correspond to the right axis in red and black 
respectively. 

=== PAGE 5 ===
 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
5
in the SIBAL case, but the burn event is significantly longer in the PMMA event, which generates more overall 
products.  This will be evident in the CO2 responses shown further in the paper. 
 
The CO2 and H2O production rates for the SIBAL burn was determined by assuming stoichiometric combustion 
and by using the fuel mass loss rate (MLR). This was calculated by the experimental burn rate of the fuel measured in 
mm/s, as well as the sample area (A) and density (ρs) of the sample, as given by Eq. 2. These values are given in Table 
3. The stoichiometric equations for cotton and PMMA burning are given by Eq. 3 and 4 respectively, which are used 
to determine the product yield from the MLR. SIBAL is 75% cotton, which was factored into the calculation. 
. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   (2) 
 
 
Table 3. Fuel sample values 
  
SIBAL 
PMMA 
Sample Cross Sectional Area (m2) 
1.27x10-4 
1.27x10-4 
Density (kg/m3) 
573 
1180 
Max Spread Rate (mm/s) 
3.60 
- 
CO2 Stoichometric Yield (kgCO2/kgFuel) 
1.63 
1.76 
H2O Stoichometric Yield (kgH2O/kgFuel) 
0.56 
0.58 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   (3) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
             
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   (4) 
 
IV. Results and Discussion 
In Saffire-IV, the temperature and CO2 
concentration of the RS measurements show 
varying baseline values due to calibration 
differences10. Consequently, all RS and FFD 
trends presented here are normalized by their pre-
ignition baseline, thereby scaling temperatures and 
concentrations to initial cabin value. One example 
of non-normalized data is given for context by 
Figure 5, which shows the RS3 CO2 and 
temperature data for the SIBAL burn. The FFD 
response, shown in Figure 6, gives an excellent 
prediction. The model captures the upward trend 
in the FFD better than it does with most RS 
locations, while also providing a better match of 
the steady state value. The light blue line in Figure 
6 gives the mean CO2 for the vehicle and it 
compares well with the data at the FFD. This is an 
indication the vehicle species concentration is well 
mixed in the section that contains the FFD. Figure 7 gives the RS responses to CO2. Overall, there is a decent 
agreement between experimental and model values, with RS1 providing the best fit. The model  rises earlier and over-
estimate the steady state CO2 value. RS3 rose the fastest and had the most overshoot of the steady state value since it 
was in the direct path of the Saffire outlet, with RS6 showing similar behavior for the same reason. The other four had 
to rely on mixing and diffusion before elevated CO2 was recorded. Experimentally, RS2 was by far the slowest to 
respond and did not even reach steady state, while all other responses reached steady state in at least 400 seconds. 
 
Figure 5. CO2 and Temperature response from RS3 
during SIBAL burn event. 

=== PAGE 6 ===
 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
6
This could be due to a malfunction in the sensor or 
poor placement within Cygnus, such as being 
obstructed by too much trash. 
Figure 8 gives the temperature at the FFD. A 
very weak experimental response is shown, while 
the model response is closest to RS1, RS2, and 
RS5 that are not directly in the flow path. Also 
shown in Figure 8 is the mass mean temperature of 
the model, which analogous to the CO2 response, 
compares well with the FFD temperature. Figure 9 
gives the RS behavior for the SIBAL burn 
temperature. Similar to the CO2 response, the 
model has a higher temperature response than the 
experiment. This is most prevalent in RS1, for 
which the experimental response is slow and does 
not reach steady state. This could be due to the 
nadir bulkhead, and other items in that section of 
Cygnus that absorb heat. This would increase the 
 
Figure 6. Normalized CO2 response from FFD and mean 
vehicle CO2 concentration during SIBAL burn event. 
 
Figure 7. Normalized CO2 RS responses during SIBAL burn event. 

=== PAGE 7 ===
 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
7
surface temperature of cargo and the spacecraft, 
decreasing the rate at which heat decreases from 
the gas phase, as opposed to the constant 
temperature boundary condition currently use 
which allows for the maximum heat loss. RS2 
seemed unresponsive to the burn event, likely due 
to the reasons given for the CO2 response of RS2. 
As expected, the largest temperature response is 
given by RS3 and RS6 since they are directly in  
the flow path, whereas heat response is more a 
function of mixing and diffusion at the other 
locations.   
A counter intuitive result shows that in many 
instances, especially for the RS locations in the 
direct flow path  (RS3, RS6), that the data is more 
noisy in the model results as opposed to the 
experimental results. There are two possible 
reasons for this phenomenon. Since the RS uses a 
 
Figure 9. Normalized temperature RS responses during SIBAL burn event. 
 
Figure 8. Normalized temperature response from FFD 
and mass mean vehicle temperature during SIBAL burn 
event. 

=== PAGE 8 ===
 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
8
pump to suck CO2 at that location to the actual 
sensor,  even if it is a small area, it is averaging 
concentration around the probe area, which likely 
smooths out the turbulent effects, whereas in the 
model, the RS is measuring one node in space and 
it is directly in the air flow and subject to the 
turbulent air flow. Another reason for the 
measured profile being smoother is in the details 
of how the remote sensors are attached to the 
beams. While in the model, the beams are just 
solid rectangular prisms, the real beams resemble 
I-beams, and have strap hooks to keep the cargo in 
place. In the experiment, the RS are often behind 
these strap hooks which also shields it from 
turbulence.   
The PMMA sample was preheated with the 
igniter at a lower current (1.0 amp for 600 s), and 
then ignited at 4 amps for 20 s. All charts that 
 
Figure 10. Normalized CO2 response from FFD during 
PMMA burn event. 
 
Figure 11. Normalized CO2 RS responses during PMMA burn event. 

=== PAGE 9 ===
 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
9
include data for the PMMA burn start during the 
4-amp ignition phase. This results in a slow 
increase in CO2 as the vapor from the preheat is 
ignited, and rises sharply as the solid begins to be 
consumed. Unfortunately, the burn was more 
energetic than expected, causing data to be lost. 
The data that is there fits well in the increasing 
phase of the response. Figure 10 gives the FFD 
CO2 response to the PMMA burn, which provides 
another good model prediction. As expected, the 
CO2 reaches a higher level in the PMMA burn as 
compared to the SIBAL burn, reaching steady 
state value that is 2.8 times the baseline value, 
compared to 1.4 for the SIBAL burn. This 
corresponds to a steady state CO2 model value of 
approximately 11,000 ppm and 6100 ppm for the 
PMMA and SIBAL event, respectively.  Figure 
 
Figure 12. Normalized temperature response from FFD 
and mass mean vehicle temperature during PMMA burn 
event. 
 
Figure 13. Normalized Temperature RS responses during PMMA burn event. 

=== PAGE 10 ===
 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
10 
11 shows the RS CO2 data for the PMMA burn. Similar to the SIBAL burn, the FFD mirrors RS1, RS4, and RS5 with 
a steady climb and no overshoot.  
Figure 12 gives the FFD temperature data for the PMMA burn. Very similar to the FFD temperature data for 
SIBAL, there is a very weak response. Figure 13 displays the RS temperature data for the PMMA burn. Being a more 
energetic fuel, the temperature increases are expectedly higher than the SIBAL burn. The PMMA model seemed to 
make better predictions of the temperature, especially in the RS1 location. Similar to the SIBAL test, the FFD 
temperature data shown in Figure 12 was very slow to respond. Since there was good response in other locations 
where heat and species had to get transported, it is likely that the FFD temperature sensor was surrounded by material 
that conducted a lot of heat away from the sensor.  
In the SIBAL cases, when the SFU fan was turned down around the 200 s mark, the fire was nearly out, and hence 
no change in the response for the CO2 or temperature was observed. However, in the PMMA case, turning down the 
fan did not fully extinguish the fire, and a decrease in CO2 response can be seen in RS3, RS6 and RS1. While the 
PMMA flame was put out by the reduced flow, the temperature was still hot enough to vaporize the fuel. Hence, when 
the fan was turned back on, a deflagration wave ignited the flame again. RS3 and RS6 are in the flow path, therefore 
changes in Saffire flow will affect those locations disproportionately. RS1 is likely the closest sensor location, so even 
though it is out of the flow path, there is still some effect. The model predicted a larger dip than was realized by the 
sensors.  
 
The CO2 prediction in both burn events over-predicted the steady state CO2 value. A reason for the difference 
could be the assumption of stoichiometric combustion. There is a region of the microgravity flame under an oxygen 
shadow, cast by the upstream part of the flame, which prevents combustion from continuing9,15. Soot, CO, unburned 
hydrocarbons could contribute to the differences between model and experiment.  Another reason for the discrepancy 
is the free volume could be different than what the model and NG predicted. Calculations were performed after the 
event 2 CO2 release that predicted a higher free volume10. Pressure, temperature, and concentration data from event 2 
were used in two independent models, which applied different assumptions to the equations of state. The secondary 
constant mass (SCM) model divides the total vehicle volume into the free volume, where the released gasses can mix, 
and a sub-volume of constant mass that does not exchange with the free volume. This model was developed to reflect 
cargo and trash that approximates sealed volumes where gas cannot escape. Similarly, the secondary constant volume 
(SCV) model divides the total vehicle volume into two sub-volumes, but instead assumes that the two sub-volumes 
do exchange gas such that both volumes remain constant. This model can be used to predict gases trapped between 
bags. In the case of Saffire IV, the SCM and SCV model predicted the same volume of 18.7m3. 
 
These SCM and SCV models were developed to reflect the potential behavior of trash within Cygnus: the SCM 
model approximates sealed volumes where gases cannot escape from trash bags, and the SCV model approximates 
gases trapped between bags. Because these models represent different potential trash packing scenarios, O2 release 
conditions are considered based on both models and knowledge of how the vehicle trash was packed. While the model 
in this work uses perfect rectangular boxes to represent cargo and trash, the real trash bags are amorphous in shape, 
and the cargo is wrapped in a porous Nomex fabric that could also provide more air for mixing. This increase in 
volume would explain why the CO2 in the experiment would reach a smaller steady state value than in the model. 
 
V. Conclusions 
 
A model using NIST’s FDS code was developed to determine the effects of the Saffire IV flame events on the 
Cygnus vehicle. Measurements of CO2 and temperature were taken at six locations throughout the vehicle, in addition 
to the FFD. The heat addition rate was calculated based on the inlet and outlet Saffire temperatures, and the product 
generation rates were calculated based on the flame spread rate and the stoichiometry of combustion of the sample. 
The model did a reasonable job of predicting the CO2 data, while over-predicting in some cases. This could be due to 
a wide range of reasons, with one prevalent reason being the uncertainty in the vehicle free air volume. The model 
predicted the temperature behavior well on the increasing part of the curve but also over-predicted the peak and 
decreased faster than the experimental measurement curve. Both the model and the experimental data highlighted the 
effect a spacecraft fire has on the vehicle, such as product mixing and heat transfer. Better capturing the free volume 
of the vehicle could provide improvements to the predictive capabilities of the model, as well as changing the surface 
boundary conditions to allow the participation of surface materials in the adsorption of heat.  
 

=== PAGE 11 ===
 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
11 
Acknowledgments 
The Saffire projected was supported by NASA’s Advanced Exploration Systems Division. The authors like would 
like to thank the project manager Gary Ruff and the principal investigator David Urban for their leadership on the 
project and technical expertise on the subject. Additionally, the authors support the international Saffire science team, 
with various agencies that include ESA, JAXA, CNES, RSA, DLR, the Russian Academy of Sciences and NASA. 
The authors are grateful for the efforts of ZIN Technologies, NG, and the on-orbit crew of the ISS on the Saffire 
project.   
 
References 
 
1Fujita, Osamu., "Solid combustion research in microgravity as a basis of fire safety in space," Proceedings of the Combustion 
Institute, Vol. 35.3, 2015, pp. 2487-2502. 
2Xiaoyang, Z., Liao, Y-T., T., Johnston, M.C., James, S., Ferkul, P., V., and Olson, S., L., "Concurrent flame growth, spread, 
and quenching over composite fabric samples in low speed purely forced flow in microgravity," Proceedings of the Combustion 
Institute Vol. 36.2, 2017, pp. 2971-2978. 
3Meyer, M. E., Mulholland, G. W., Bryg, V., Urban, D. L., Yuan, Z.-G., Ruff, G. A., Cleary, T., and Yang, J., “Smoke 
Characterization and Feasibility of the Moment Method for Spacecraft Fire Detection,” Aerosol Sci. Technol., Vol. 49.5, 2015, pp. 
299–309. 
 
4Ruff, G. A., Urban, D. L., Fernandez-Pello, A. C., T’ien, J. S., Torero, J. L., Legros, G., Eigenbrod, C., Smirnov, N., Fujita, 
O., Cowlard, A. J., Rouvreau, S., Minster, O., Toth, B., and Jomaas, G., “Spacecraft Fire Experiment (Saffire) Development Status,” 
44th International Conference on Environmental Systems, ICES-2014-265, Texas Tech University Libraries, 2014. 
5Jomaas, G., Torero, J. T., Eigenbrod, C., Niehaus, J., Olson, S. L., Ferkul, P. V., Legros, G., Fernandez-Pello, C., Cowlard, A. 
J., Rouvreau, S., Smirnov, N., Fujita, O., T’ien, J. S., Ruff, G. A., and Urban, D. L., “Fire Safety in Space – Beyond Flammability 
Testing of Small Sample,” Acta Astronautica, Vol. 109, 2015, pp. 208-216. 
 
6Ruff, G. and Urban, D., “Operation and Development Status of the Spacecraft Fire Experiments (Saffire),” 46th International 
Conference on Environmental Systems, ICES-2016-428, Texas Tech University Libraries, 2016. 
 
7Ferkul, P. V., Olson, S., Urban, D. L., Ruff, G. A., Easton, J., T’ien, J. S., Liao, Y.-T. T., Fernandez-Pello, A. C., Torero, J. 
L., Eigenbrod, C., Legros, G., Smirnov, N., Fujita, O., Rouvreau, S., Toth, B., and Jomaas, G., “Results of Large-Scale Spacecraft 
Flammability Tests,” 47th International Conference on Environmental Systems,  ICES-2017-224, Texas Tech University Libraries, 
2017. 
 
8Thomsen, M., Fernandez-Pello, A. C., Urban, D. L., Ruff, G. A., and Olson, S. L. “Upward Flame Spread over a Thin 
Composite Fabric: The Effect of Pressure and Microgravity,” 48th International Conference on Environmental Systems, ICES-
2018-231, Texas Tech University Libraries, 2018. 
9Urban, D., Ruff, G., Ferkul, P., Owens, J., Olson, S., Meyer, M., Fortenberry, C., Brooker, J., Graf, J., Casteel, M., Jomaas, 
G., Toth, B., Eigenbrod, C., T’Ien, J., Liao, Y.-T., Fernandez-Pello, C., Meyer, F., Legros, G., Guibaud, A., Smirnov, N., and Fujita, 
O., “Fire Safety Implications of Preliminary Results from Saffire IV and V Experiments on Large Scale Spacecraft Fires,” 50th 
International Conference on Environmental Systems, ICES-2021-266, Texas Tech University Libraries, 2021. 
10Fortenberry, C., Casteel, M., Graf, J., Easton, J., Niehaus, J., Meyer, M., Urban, D., Ruff, G., “Evaluation of Combustion 
Products from Large-Scale Spacecraft Fires during the Saffire-IV and Saffire-V Experiments,” 50th International Conference on 
Environmental Systems, ICES-2021-244, Texas Tech University Libraries, 2021. 
 
11Wang, X., Zhou, H., Arnott, W.P., Meyer, M.E., Taylor, S., Firouzkouhi, H., Moosmüller, H., Chow, J.C. and Watson, J.G., 
“Evaluation of gas and particle sensors for detecting spacecraft-relevant fire emissions,” Fire Safety Journal, Vol. 113, 2020, pp. 
102977-102988. 
 
12FDS, Fire Dynamics Simulator, Software Package, Ver. FDS6.7.5-0-g71f025606, National Institute of Standards and 
Technology, Gaithersburg, MD, 2004. http://dx.doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1019. 
 
13Pyrosim, Software Package, Ver. 2021-2, Thunderhead Engineering, Manhattan, KS, 2014. 
 
14Philip, J., D., SFPE handbook of fire protection engineering. 3rd ed., Society of Fire Protection Engineers, Gaithersburg, MD,  
2002, Chap. 2. 
 
15Prasad, K., Nakamura, Y., Olson, S. L., Fujita, O., Nishizawa, K., Ito, K., & Kashiwagi, T., “Effect of wind velocity on flame 
spread in microgravity,” Proceedings of the Combustion Institute, Vol. 29.2, pp. 2553-2560, 2002. 
