
=== PAGE 1 ===
54th International Conference on Environmental Systems 
ICES-2025-392 
13-17 July 2025, Prague, Czech Republic 
Solid Fuel Ignition Testing for Lunar Applications, Theory 
and Experimental Results 
David Urban1, Sandra Olson2, Daniel Dietrich3, Dennis Stocker4, Michael Johnston5, Paul Ferkul6, Gary Ruff7, 
Jennifer Zayac8  
NASA Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, OH, 44135  
Susana Harper9, Alfredo Juarez 10,Steven Peralta11 
NASA JSC White Sands Test Facility, Las Cruces, NM 88012 
Carlos Fernandez-Pello12,  
University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, 94720, USA 
Maria Thomsen13 
Universidad Adolfo Ibáñez, Santiago, Chile  
Ya-Ting Liao14 
Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio 44106 
Harold Beeson15 
WHA International Inc., Las Cruces, NM, 88007 
and 
Gregory Harrigan16 
 NASA Kennedy Space Center, Merritt Island, FL, 32899 
To address the risk of enhanced flammability in lunar gravity, NASA has initiated a 
program to develop a new test method that provides an estimate of the flammability 
enhancement expected in lunar gravity. An overview of the physical phenomena that control 
NASA material flammability testing is presented with discussion of how this testing is being 
adapted to evaluate material flammability in lunar gravity. Testing in drop towers and on 
 
1 Aerospace Engineer, Low-Gravity Exploration Technology Branch, NASA GRC, 21000 Brookpark Road 
2 Aerospace Engineer, Low-Gravity Exploration Technology Branch, NASA GRC, 21000 Brookpark Road 
3 Aerospace Engineer, Low-Gravity Exploration Technology Branch, NASA GRC, 21000 Brookpark Road 
4 Aerospace Engineer, Low-Gravity Exploration Technology Branch, NASA GRC, 21000 Brookpark Road 
5 Aerospace Engineer, Low-Gravity Exploration Technology Branch, NASA GRC, 21000 Brookpark Road 
6 Aerospace Engineer (Retired), NASA GRC, 21000 Brookpark Road 
7 Staff Scientist, Universities Space Research Assoc. (USRA), 21000 Brookpark Road 
8 Intern, Low-Gravity Exploration Technology Branch, NASA GRC, 21000 Brookpark Road 
9 Cabin Materials Flight Acceptance Standard Testing Manager, NASA WSTF, 12600 NASA Rd 
10 Flight Acceptance Standard Test and Oxygen Hazards Branch Manager, Sierra Lobo Inc. NASA WSTF, 12600 
NASA Rd 
11 Project Manager, NASA WSTF, 12600 NASA Rd 
12 Professor of the Graduate School, Mechanical Engineering, Berkeley, CA, 94720. 
13 Faculty of Engineering and Science, Diagonal Las Torres 2640, Peñalolén, Santiago, Chile. 
14 Associate Professor, Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, Glennan 479 
15 Principal Chemist, WHA International Inc.,5605 Dona Ana Rd, 
16 Senior Technical Leader, NASA Engineering & Safety Center, M7-0355:1702. 

=== PAGE 2 ===
2 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
reduced gravity aircraft has shown that there can be enhanced flammability (flames can exist 
at lower ambient oxygen concentrations compared to terrestrial gravity) at partial gravity 
levels close to those found on the moon. This was identified as a risk for the Human Landing 
System program. However, lunar gravity testing is largely limited to using a centrifuge in the 
NASA GRC 5.2 second drop tower. This paper discusses the fundamentals of material 
flammability and extinction, and develops a Damköhler-number based estimate of the blow-
off flammability limit. This relationship is compared to the results from material flammability 
tests in a highspeed blow-off facility at the NASA White Sands Test Facility (WSTF) (1-g) and 
the Glenn Research Center (GRC) Zero Gravity Facility partial gravity centrifuge.  
Acronyms and Nomenclature 
 
CKL 
=    Chemical Kinetic Limit 
HLS          =   Human Landing System 
HOI 
= High Gas Velocity Oxygen Index  
HTL 
=    Heat Transfer Limit 
LOC 
=    Limiting Oxygen Concentration  
UHOI 
= Upward High Gas Velocity Oxygen Index  
I. Introduction 
ASA has focused on material selection as a primary means of fire prevention.  The method for selecting fire safe 
materials has been NASA STD 6001 Test 1 (hereafter referred to as Test 1)1.  Test 1 is an upward flammability 
test that uses a consistent ignition source (known as the chemical igniter) that is considered to be a very strong ignition 
source1.  If the flame damaged zone is found to be less than 15.2 cm (6”), the material is determined to be self-
extinguishing for the test conditions. The concept was that with a strong ignition source in upward spread, the test will 
be conservative. The purpose of the test is not to identify materials that will never burn but rather to identify materials 
that do not burn easily and will self-extinguish in most situations. Given the test design, for most materials, Test 1 is 
an ignition test, if the material has enough specific heat or low enough heat release, it will pass but it might not pass 
with a bigger igniter or if the material were 
slightly preheated. In the case of thin materials 
of limited spread rate, it is possible for Test 1 to 
function as a flammability test.  
 
Testing in drop towers and on reduced 
gravity aircraft2,3 has shown that materials can 
have broader flammability limits (e.g. oxygen 
limits) at partial gravity levels close to those 
found on the moon and this was identified as a 
risk for the Human Landing System (HLS). 
Since our only repeatable access to lunar gravity 
is in the NASA GRC 5.2 second drop tower, 
using a centrifuge3, testing has been limited to 
thinner materials that can be tested in 5.2 
seconds. This paper discusses the result of a test 
campaign to assess the change in material 
flammability at lunar gravity levels and to 
determine if there is a correction factor that could 
be applied to the results of NASA Test 1 to 
encompass lunar flammability limits.  
 
NASA habitability requirements dictate that 
low gravity spacecraft4 demonstrate continuous 
ventilation in all open areas and there will be 
buoyant air flow on lunar habitats, so in many 
cases it is reasonable that NASA’s material 
N
 
Figure 1. Extinction Boundary for opposed flame spread 
over thin cellulosic fuel (Ref. 5). This figure combines 
quiescent and low-speed tests with high-speed wind tunnel 
tests. The left side represents the quenching branch where the 
flame extinguishes due to heat loss and the right side is the 
blowoff branch where the flow rate exceeds the chemical 
reaction rate, so the flame is blown off the fuel. These two 
mechanisms combine to establish a limiting oxygen 
concentration at the intersection of the two sides. 

=== PAGE 3 ===
3 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
flammability testing is based on blow-off limits where air flow dominates the transport rather than the diffusion 
quenching possible at very low flow conditions. However, it is possible that some materials will experience quenching 
extinction rather than blow-off at lunar or Martian gravity levels. This important issue is addressed in this work.  
II. Flammability Limits 
The existence of a low-speed quenching extinguishment boundary and a higher speed blowoff boundary was 
predicted numerically for solid fuels in stagnation flow5. This phenomenon was subsequently shown experimentally6 
for thin cellulosic materials in opposed flow (Fig 1). Fire and flames can be divided into several classes: gaseous 
(premixed and nonpremixed (diffusion)), with diffusion flames including gaseous flames and liquid and solid fuels 
(charring, noncharring and surface burning), and smoldering combustion of solid fuels. This paper will discuss solid 
fuel combustion with some overlap with surface smoldering/char combustion as schematically depicted in figure2. 
With the exception of smoldering combustion and burning of metals and carbon, all materials burn in the gas phase. 
This fuel phase-change creates a fundamental difference between condensed fuel combustion and that of gaseous 
fuels. Continued burning of the fuel requires sufficient energy feedback from the flame to the fuel to pyrolyze or 
vaporize more fuel.  This feedback controls the flame size and spread rate. Extinction of the gaseous flame also occurs 
by different processes than extinguishment of the smoldering char phase. Many of the nonmelting compounds that 
must pyrolyze to burn, do not completely convert to gaseous compounds and instead also produce a substantial mass 
fraction of char which is primarily carbon and burns in the solid phase.  This class of fuels are known as charring fuels 
of which the most common example is cellulosic materials (wood, cotton, paper).  The glowing coals are the surface 
combustion of the char residue from the pyrolysis. Many important spacecraft materials (Nomex and Kevlar) are also 
charring materials. This work will focus on extinguishment of the gas phase flame over the solid fuel rather than the 
surface reaction of the charring solid. 
Flame spread over solid fuels is often modeled as a progressive ignition process where the flame heats the next 
portion of fuel to produce the necessary fuel vapor and then provides the ignition pilot, enabling the flame to spread 
forward7,8.  Figure 28 depicts the most important transport processes in an upward spreading flame. The flame base at 
the bottom end of the flame is the attachment point of the flame 
where oxygen diffuses to the flame surface from the free stream and 
reacts with the fuel vapor emerging from the fuel surface by surface 
blowing and diffusion.  If the incoming oxidizer flow is too fast for 
the flame chemistry, the flame will be blown downstream (blowoff).   
Beneath the flame is a region designated as the pyrolysis length. 
This region of fuel has been heated to the pyrolysis temperature and 
is emitting the unburned fuel vapor that supports the flame.  Further 
downstream is the heating length portion of the fuel which is being 
heated from ambient temperature to the pyrolysis temperature by the 
flame. The major transport mechanisms for a thin fuel are 
convective/conductive heating of the fuel by the flame, radiative 
heating of the fuel by the flame, and radiative heat loss from the fuel. 
As the fuel becomes thicker, conductive transport in the solid phase 
fuel becomes more significant although for upward buoyant spread, 
heat transfer from the gas phase has been shown to be remain more 
significant than conduction in the solid phase9. The process is similar 
for opposed (downward) flame spread except the view factor for 
radiation from the flame to the fuel surface (Qfr*) becomes less 
significant and the preheat length is shorter. 
Under normal gravity conditions, concurrent flame spread is faster than opposed flow flame spread and often 
grows continuously until the fire becomes quite large. Opposed spread can achieve steady conditions in normal 
gravity. The Saffire experiment found that both concurrent and opposed spread could be steady for samples roughly 
0.8 m in length for a thin cellulosic fuel10. The progressive or creeping ignition process has been represented as the 
ratio of the heated length and the time to heat this length of fuel to the pyrolysis temperature and to ignite the gas.7,8 
 
𝑉௙ൌ𝑙௛/ሺ𝑡௣௦൅𝑡௜௚)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Eq. 1) 
Where 𝑉௙ is the flame spread rate,  𝑙௛ is the heated length,  𝑡௣௦ is the solid pyrolysis time and  𝑡௜௚  is the gas-phase 
ignition time. The solid pyrolysis time can be estimated  (Eq. 2)  by calculating the energy needed to raise the fuel 
temperature to the pyrolysis temperature 𝜌௦𝑐௦𝑑൫𝑇௣െ𝑇௢൯ for a thin fuel and dividing it by the sum of the heat fluxes 
Figure 
2. 
Schematic 
diagram 
of 
concurrent flame spread over a thick 
sample8. 

=== PAGE 4 ===
4 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
(convective flux to the sample, radiative loss from the solid and radiative flux to the sample from the flame).  The 
formulation is similar for a thick solid, but this discussion will focus on thermally thin solids. 
  𝑡௣௦ൌ 
ఘೞ௖ೞௗ൫்೛ି்
೚൯ 
௛ ൫்೑ି்
೛൯ି௤ሶೝೞ
ᇲᇲାି௤ሶ೑ೝ
ᇲᇲା௤ሶ೐ೣ೟
ᇲᇲ    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Eq. 2) 
Where h   is the convective heat transfer coefficient; 𝑞′′௙௥ is the flame radiant flux to the solid; 𝑞′′௘௫௧ is the external 
radiant flux; 𝑞′′௥௦ is the re-radiation from the solid surface; 𝜌௦, 𝑐௦ are solid density and specific heat; d is the solid 
thickness; 𝑇௣ and 𝑇଴ are the pyrolysis and initial temperatures of the solid. 
Using the approximations developed by Niioka11, Thomsen8 developed a simplified relationship for  𝑡௜௚ based on 
the Damköhler number which is the ratio of the flow time to the chemical reaction time (Da= tfl/ tch) and is used to 
capture the chemical reaction rate in the parameter related to the ratio of the critical Damköhler number (Dacr) of the 
problem and the local Damköhler number (Dax). 
𝑡௜௚ൌ𝐶ଶ𝑡௙௟ ln ቀ1 െ
  ஽௔೎ೝ
஽௔௫ቁ    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Eq. 3) 
Where the numbering convention for coefficients is taken from Pello7. For flow dominated transport, the 
Damköhler number is the ratio of the flow time to the chemical time. 
𝐷𝑎ൌ
௧೑೗
௧೎೓ ൌ
௟೎ 
௎ಮ
௤ೝ 
ఘ    
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Eq. 4) 
where 𝑙௖ is the characteristic length and 𝑞௥ is the reaction rate which is calculated using Arrhenius kinetics for flow 
dominated transport.8 
𝐷𝑎ൌ
௟೎
௨ಮ𝐴଴exp ቀെ
ாೌ
ோ்ቁ𝑋௙௨௘௟
௔
𝑋ைమ
௕ሺ
௉
ோ்ሻ௔ା௕  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Eq. 5) 
Where 𝐴଴ and 𝐸௔ are the pre-exponential factor and activation energy, 𝑅௨ is the universal gas constant, 𝑋௙௨௘௟ is 
the mole fraction of fuel, and 𝑋ைଶ is the mole fraction of fuel and oxygen respectively, and 𝑃 is ambient pressure, 𝑎 
and 𝑏 represent the order of the reaction and are assumed to be unity. In the blowoff regime, the Damköhler number 
identifies when the reaction rate is sufficiently high that the flame can keep up with the flow field and not blow off. If 
the number is small, the chemical time is larger than the flow time. In equation 5 it is clear that increased air flow (u∞) 
decreases the Da and increasing the oxygen concentration or the temperature increases the Da. 
Combining equations 2 and 3 through equation 1 gives the formulation for the flame spread rate for thin fuels 
yields equation 6. 
𝑉௙ൌ𝑙௛൤
ఘೞ௖ೞఛ൫்೛ି்
೚൯ 
௤ሶ೑೎
ᇲᇲା௤ሶ೑ೝ
ᇲᇲି
௤ሶೝೞ
ᇲᇲା௤ሶ೐ೣ೟
ᇲᇲെ𝐶ଶ𝑡௙௟ ln ቀ1 െ
  ஽௔೎ೝ
஽௔ೣቁ൨ି
ଵ
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Eq. 6) 
The first term in the bracketed factor is the heat transfer term which comprises the heat transfer processes that 
define the pyrolysis time (specific heat versus heat transport).  The second term is the chemical kinetics term that 
defines the ignition time.  
As the spread rate approaches zero, the Limiting Oxygen Concentration (LOC) for flame spread has been achieved 
and can be assumed to be very close to the extinction limit. Rearranging equation 6, we can examine the mechanisms 
for the LOC in the section below. 
𝑉௙ൌ 
௟೓ ቀ௤ሶ೑೎
ᇲᇲା௤ሶ೑ೝ
ᇲᇲି
௤ሶೝೞ
ᇲᇲା௤ሶ೐ೣ೟
ᇲᇲቁ
ఘೞ௖ೞఛ൫்೛ି்
೚൯ି஼మ௧೑೗ ୪୬ቀଵି
  ವೌ೎ೝ
ವೌೣ
ቁሺ௤ሶ೑೎
ᇲᇲା௤ሶ೑ೝ
ᇲᇲି
௤ሶೝೞ
ᇲᇲା௤ሶ೐ೣ೟
ᇲᇲሻ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Eq. 7) 
A. Heat Transfer Limit / impact of external heating:  
If the radiative loss from the sample 𝑞ሶ௥௦
ᇱᇱ equals the other forms of heat supply to the fuel, the numerator in equation 
7 will equal zero and the flame will extinguish. This is referred to as the Heat Transfer Limit (HTL) or the Quenching 
limit which is the left side of the LOC curve in figure 1. In marginal cases, the heat from external sources 𝑞ሶ௘௫௧
ᇱᇱ can 
have a significant effect in supporting the flame. The effect of external heating on flame spread and ignitability has 
been studied both with the ASTM E 132112 (LIFT) test and using the cone calorimeter as reported by Quintiere13. As 
seen in figure 3, at low flux levels, external heating increases the spread rate and at higher levels it reduces the piloted 
ignition delay. This external energy input does not have to occur simultaneously with the fire event, as it will increase 
T0 which will increase the spread rate.  Preheating of the fuel by an external source can reduce the time to ignition or 
the oxygen limit14, 15. 
Again, using the numbering convention for coefficients from Pello7, the energy balance in the numerator can be 
expanded to: 
𝐶ଵቀ𝑘௚𝜌௚𝑐௉
௎ಮ
௫ቁ
ଵ/ଶ
൫ 𝑇௙െ𝑇௣൯െ𝐹௦ஶ𝜀𝜎൫𝑇௣
ସെ𝑇ஶ
ସ ൯൅ 𝐹௙௦𝜀𝜎൫𝑇௙
ସെ𝑇௣
ସ ൯൅𝑞ሶ௘௫௧
ᇱᇱ
ൌ0   
 
 
 
 
(Eq. 8) 

=== PAGE 5 ===
5 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
In the case of 
upward flame spread 
with 
no 
external 
heating, the last term 
can be neglected and 
for near HTL flames, 
the 
radiative 
transport from the 
flame to the solid can 
be expected to be 
small due to the small 
size of the flames on 
the quenching side. 
This will cause the 
radiative 
transport 
from the flame to the 
solid to be small due 
to the limited view 
factor. That leaves a 
balance between the 
first 
two 
terms: 
conductive transport 
to 
the 
fuel 
and 
radiative loss from 
the solid. The gas properties and the flow rate are all low order while the fuel pyrolysis temperature (Tp) is fourth 
order.  This suggests that high temperature materials with a high Tp will have a HTL that is significantly displaced to 
higher velocities.16 
B. Chemical Kinetic Limit (Damköhler number Dax reaches the critical Damköhler number Dacr) 
As the gas velocity increases, the Damköhler number decreases (flow residence time decreases compare to reaction 
time). When it reaches the critical Damköhler number Dacr then  െln ቀ1 െ
஽௔೎ೝ
஽௔ቁൌ∞  (where Da is calculated using 
equation 5) so the denominator in equation 7 becomes infinite (reaction time is infinite) and the flame extinguishes. 
This determines the right-hand side of the LOC curve in figure 1.  This is also known as the Chemical Kinetic Limit 
(CKL) or the blow-off limit because the flame can often be seen to be blown downstream.  Combining predictions of 
the Heat Transfer Limit and the Chemical Kinetics Limit, the LOC curve can be predicted.  The details of the prediction 
of the limits are described elsewhere8.  
These analyses were combined in8 to calculate the extinction limits and produce figure 48. For each limit it was 
necessary to adjust one parameter (C1) in equation 8 and a parameter (𝐴଴) in equation 5. The combined limits do an 
excellent job of recovering the flammability diagram. Takahashi and co-workers assembled a similar analysis16 for 
opposed spread for a variety of polymers over forced flow in normal gravity to low-gravity conditions. Fundamentally, 
the approach followed here analytically describing the extinction limits of thin materials is consistent with that 
developed by Takahashi et al.16 An important difference is that in Takahashi’s analysis the heat transfer and chemical 
kinetics terms were derived phenomenologically with a scaling analysis, while in this work they are derived from a 
rigorous analysis of the ignition of a solid in a hot boundary layer flow7, 17. The boundary layer analysis is based on 
the novel and rigorous analysis by Niioka and co-workers17 on the ignition of a solid fuel in a stagnation point flow. 
Both works successfully address the problem with similar concepts, basing the flame extinction problem in terms of 
heat transfer and chemical kinetics processes. 
Experimental Method 
The goal was to measure the change in the extinction limit between 1-g testing and lunar-g testing in the centrifuge.  
NASA Test 1 has a 15 cm (6 inch) burn criterion, so the test time is much longer than the 5 seconds available in the 
drop tower.  Consequently a 5 second extinction criterion test program was developed to determine the change in the 
extinction limit in 1-g and lunar-g and apply this offset to NASA Test 1 flammability limits for lunar material 
certification. The approach used in this test program was to conduct a study of concurrent-flow flammability-limits in 
 
Figure 3. Flammability diagram for PMMA13 using a cone calorimeter for the 
ignition testing and a radiatively heated flame spread apparatus [12]. Proceeding 
from the right, the time to ignition (right axis) increases exponentially as the external 
heat flux decreases until the minimum (critical) heat flux necessary for ignition. At heat 
fluxes below the critical flux, the material will burn and proceeding from the left, the 
spread rate increases with heat flux. 

=== PAGE 6 ===
6 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
the planned NASA lunar habitat pressure of 56.5 kPa (8.2 psia) for several materials where the higher speed blow-off 
behavior in 1-g could be compared to the flame extinguishment in lunar-gravity buoyant flow.  This required a test 
program that included work at the NASA White Sands Test Facility (WSTF) for the 1-g buoyant flow testing and the 
NASA Glenn Research Center (GRC) Zero-Gravity Research Facility (ZGRF) for a quiescent lunar gravity 
environment. Major challenges of this comparison were the inherent difference in the ignition due to the orientation 
as will be described below and the short test time provided by the ZGF (5.2 seconds). This 5.2 second limitation 
required the testing to be based on a 5 second extinction limit rather than the 15 cm (6 inch) burn limit in NASA Test 
1. Since the testing was targeting a flammability limit rather than an ignition limit, the materials were ignited in a 
known flammable condition and the environment was changed to the test condition by reducing the oxygen 
concentration (ZGRF) or increasing the gas velocity (WSTF). 
A. NASA White Sands Test Facility (WSTF) Upward High-flow Oxygen Index Testing  
The WSTF testing was conducted using a WSTF 1.4 m3 (50 ft3) 
chamber that could provide continuous operation at 57 kPa. Installed 
in the chamber was a 7.4 cm ID by 30 cm long quartz tube duct (Fig 
5) where the 5.2 cm by 14.0 cm samples were tested. This system was 
based on the HOI ISO Standard.18 Below the test section was a flow 
conditioning section above an inlet plenum. The flow was supplied 
by a mass flow system which established the desired oxygen 
concentration and flow rate. The sample material was sandwiched 
between two, u-shaped, thin stainless-steel plates with the open end 
oriented downwards towards the igniter. The igniter was a retractable 
2.2 mm OD ceramic rod that swung away from the sample after 
ignition. The ceramic rod was heated by 0.29 mm Kanthal-A wire 
woven through the 4 holes in the ceramic.  The front and the back of 
the sample were recorded by video cameras. After installation in the 
flow duct, and pressure was established in the chamber, the sample 
was exposed to a 10 cm/s primer flow at the target oxygen 
concentration. The igniter was activated until the sample was ignited. 
The igniter was retracted, and the flame was allowed to establish for 
1 second before the flow was increased to the test condition at the 
same oxygen concentration. The flow increase occurs in 
approximately a second. If the flame extinguished in 5 seconds, it was 
 
Figure 4. Heat transfer limit and chemical kinetic limit calculated by equations 8 and 9 respectively for 
thin paper and  thin PMMA (from Thomsen et al. 8). 
 
Figure 5. Flow 
Duct 
and 
flow 
conditioner at WSTF. Lower portion is 
the 
flow 
straightener, 
top 
portion 
contains the sample. 

=== PAGE 7 ===
7 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
considered to have extinguished (passed the test).  If the flame was burning at 5 seconds, it was deemed to have not 
extinguished (failed the test). In this upward configuration the unburned sample was directly heated by the energy of 
the igniter-assisted combustion and the preheating during the primer flow period.  If the sample was flammable, the 
test was repeated at a lower oxygen concentration until a condition was found where 5 sequential tests extinguished 
(passed).   
B. NASA Glenn Research Center (GRC) Partial Gravity Testing   
The GRC testing was conducted using the centrifuge test facility in the ZGRF 5.2 second drop tower (Fig. 6).3 The 
chamber is 299 l in volume with an I.D. of 81.2 cm and an internal height if 30.5 cm. To achieve lunar gravity, the 
chamber was rotated at 20.4 RPM for several minutes before the drop (I.e. onset of microgravity) to bring the air in 
the chamber to near solid body rotation. In this configuration, (during the drop) the gravity vector was radially 
outwards, and the resulting buoyant flow was radially inward To achieve upward spread the long axis of the sample 
is oriented radially and ignited on the outside edge so the resulting buoyant flow is concurrent with the direction of 
flame spread. Owing to the short radius of rotation, there was a significant gravity gradient. The flames, however, 
(especially when near the extinction limits) did not spread significantly during the drop, so the g-variation was 
considered to have a minimal impact on the results. The short radius of rotation also caused a significant Coriolis force 
in the tangential direction19. Initial tests found that the effect was mitigated by orienting the sample surface parallel to 
the axis of rotation (long edge down) so the Coriolis flow was impeded by the sample surface. The igniter was a 
ceramic igniter very similar to the one used at WSTF except it withdrew vertically. To increase the number of tests 
for repeatability, two samples were ignited and tested in each drop. The samples were several cm apart and offset 
vertically (Fig. 6) so they did not interfere with each other. The ignition region of the sample was exposed to a slow 
flow (~30 cm/s) of gas with an oxygen concentration 5 to 10% higher than the ambient. This enabled sample ignition 
in a chamber condition where the sample might be near the flammability limit. During the ignition interval, the drop 
rig is hanging at the top of the tower and is spinning to produce a 1/6 g radial acceleration in addition to the 1-g vertical 
force. This resulting buoyant flow primarily directed laterally across the sample is less successful at heating the 
unburned sample than the purely upward flow at WSTF. The drop tower operations require the system to operate 
autonomously so the entire process was controlled automatically by the drop rig. The ignition duration and the oxygen 
enhancement were varied based on experience with ignitability of the material being tested. After a prescribed 
duration, the igniter is turned off and retracted. One second later, the oxygen enhanced flow is turned off and the 
package is released. At this point, the flow is entirely driven by buoyancy. Since the bulk of the chamber is already at 
the target atmosphere, the buoyant flow immediately sweeps in the target conditions. Both samples were observed 
with separate front and edge view cameras. In post-test video analysis, if the sample was still burning at the end of the
 
 
 
Figure 6: Left: GRC Centrifuge rig in 5.2 second drop tower bus.  Black dome is raised exposing the deck. 
Right: samples installed vertically to minimize Coriolis effects. Edge and front view cameras for each sample are 
visible. Igniter on near sample is retracted and installed on far sample. 

=== PAGE 8 ===
8 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
5 second drop, it was identified as flammable (failed). If it extinguished before the end of the drop, it was identified 
as non-flammable (passed). Tests were repeated until 4 sequential extinguishments occurred 1% lower in oxygen 
concentration than a case where it did not extinguish. 
III. Results and Discussion 
Five materials were tested in both facilities. The results are plotted with oxygen concentration versus force flow 
speed in figures 7-12. All materials were tested in the WSTF facility for at least 4 flow rates (60, 80, 100, 144 cm/s) 
with PMMA having additional testing at 25 and 40 cm/s. Three of the materials typically fail NASA test 1 (are 
flammable) in air (PMMA, P213 Tape (fiberglass with an acrylic (PMMA) adhesive), and cotton t-shirt material) and 
two materials pass Test 1 in air  (polycarbonate and Nomex Velcro). The passed (o) and failed (x) tests are all shown 
on the plot. The limit (black circle) is the highest concentration where 5 (out  of 5) consecutive passes were observed. 
The horizontal axis is what could be measured in the laboratory, the forced flow velocity. Although estimates exist 
for the buoyant flow of spreading flames,16,20 near the extinction limit, the validity of these estimates is less clear, so 
the data are plotted with the forced velocity. The lunar gravity centrifuge data is shown with a horizontal line in the 
lower velocity range because the actual velocity (induced by the simulated gravity) is not known. The lunar-g limit
 
    
    
 
Figure 7: 0.8 mm PMMA Sample, 8.2 psia 
UHOI values with the best fit for the WSTF data 
for 60 cm/s and above with the GRC lunar gravity 
data shown as a horizontal line. 
Figure 8: P-213 Tape sample, 8.2 psia UHOI 
values with the best fit for the WSTF data with the 
GRC lunar gravity data shown as a horizontal line. 
 
 
            
 
 
Figure 9: Cotton T-Shirt material (Beefy-T), 8.2 
psia UHOI values for extinction of the gas phase 
flame with the best fit for the WSTF data with the 
GRC lunar gravity data shown as a horizontal line.  
 
Figure 10: Cotton T-Shirt material (Beefy-T), 8.2 
psia UHOI values for smolder extinction with the 
best fit for the WSTF data with the GRC lunar 
gravity data shown as a horizontal line. As a charring 
fuel, cotton exhibits two extinguishment modes, 
blow off extinction of the flame and extinguishment 
of the smoldering char. 

=== PAGE 9 ===
9 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
was also found by multiple passes (usually 4) below the lowest oxygen concentration fail. In figures 7, 8 and 9, the 
lunar-g buoyant limit was found to be less than the extrapolated value (for any assumed buoyant velocity) from the 
WSTF testing. This result is contrary to expected behavior. The WSTF upward ignition is expected to heat the material 
more effectively thereby increasing the fuel concentration and increasing the Damköhler number seen in equation 8. 
The lower extinction concentration for the lunar-g testing for PMMA, P213 and flaming Beefy-T suggest that the 
buoyant velocity is very low, but it does not correlate with the WSTF data. Various differences in the test methods 
have been considered (turbulence at high flow rates, ignition times, delay after ignition before initiating the test, 
oxygen augmentation during ignition, and buoyancy-enhanced ignition heat transfer to the unburned fuel due to the 
sample orientation with respect to gravity) but have not been definitively found to be the cause. Further study of this 
unexplained behavior is warranted to before the UHOI can be accepted as a material flammability standard. Comparing 
the results for polycarbonate with Takahashi’s16 low gravity tests, good agreement is seen in figure 13. Less good 
agreement is seen for the Nomex tests. This is likely because the Takahashi tested a Nomex fabric while this test series 
used a much thicker Nomex Velcro product.  
The extinction curves in figure 13 were calculated similarly to figure 4 using the values in table 1 and equations 8 
and 9. Ambient properties were determined at a reference temperature of 1250 K, which is approximately the mean 
between Tf and To, rendering: ρg=0.275 [kg/m3], kg=24.35×10-3  [W/mK], cp=1.38×103  [J/kgK].   
 
 
 
     
 
  
Figure11: Polycarbonate, 8.2 psia UHOI values 
with the best fit for the WSTF data with the GRC 
lunar gravity data shown as a horizontal line. 
Figure 12: Nomex Velcro, 8.2 psi UHOI values 
with the best fit for the WSTF data with the GRC 
lunar gravity data shown as a horizontal line. 
Table 1 Material Properties used to calculate the limits 
Property 
PMMA 21,22  
Nomex 23 
Polycarbonate24,25 
𝜌 ሾ𝑘𝑔/𝑚ଷሿ 
1190  
1370 
1200 
𝑐௦ ሾ𝐽/𝑘𝑔𝐾ሿ 
1400  
1255 
1150 
𝜀 ሾെሿ 
0.9 
0.9 
0.9 
Δ𝐻௣ ሾ𝐽/𝑘𝑔ሿ 
1350 ൈ10ଷ 
1350 ൈ10ଷ 
1350 ൈ10ଷ 
Δ𝐻௖ ሾ𝐽/𝑘𝑔ሿ 
60.2 ൈ10଺ 
44.1 ൈ10଺ 
33.6 ൈ10଺ 
𝐸௔ሾ𝐽/𝑚𝑜𝑙ሿ 
125000 
408000 
200000 
𝐴଴ሾ𝑐𝑚ଷ/𝑔𝑠ሿ 
1.2 ൈ10ଵସ 
4.3 ൈ10ଵସ 
3.04 ൈ10ଵସ 
a [-] 
1 
1 
1 
b [-] 
1 
1 
1 
𝑇௣ ሾ𝐾ሿ 
618 
750 
700 

=== PAGE 10 ===
10 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
 
A. Compensation Factor Determination 
The method to determine the compensation factor involved performing a best fit line to the WSTF limit points 
(black circles).  The best fit line to those points is the estimated dependence of the limiting oxygen concentration on 
forced flow velocity.  To get a conservative estimate of the slope (and thus the compensation factor) we used the one-
tailed 95 percent confidence interval.  Table 2 shows both the best fit line and the conservative estimate from the 95 
percent confidence interval. To estimate the change in the flammability limit at 1-g  compared to lunar-g, the 
extrapolated value from the WSTF testing can be compared to the extrapolated value at lunar g. A major limitation to 
this analysis is identification of the relevant buoyant velocity which is an area worthy of significant research. In a 
forced-flow low-gravity experiment, the average duct velocity can be known exactly, however, due to effects such as 
boundary layer growth and thermal expansion, the velocity varies with time and location so while the average duct 
velocity is representative of the flow field, it is not necessarily the same value as the velocity at the controlling location. 
For buoyant flames, with or without forced flow, the velocity at any location varies similarly to the non-buoyant case 
but it is not easily measured, particularly because the location of greatest interest is not known. For flames on the CKL 
side, the velocity at the flame tip can be assumed to be likely the most important location but this has not been verified 
or measured accurately. In a buoyant boundary layer, the velocity at the flame tip would not be comparable to the 
average duct velocity in non-buoyant cases. The 1-g buoyant velocity was estimated by Takahashi16 to be 35 cm/s, 
but the lunar gravity velocity is not known. The lunar gravity velocity has been estimated20, for spreading flames, by 
equating the buoyant boundary layer thickness with the forced flow boundary layer. However, both of these estimates 
are difficult to verify. Furthermore, near the extinction limit, the flame is weaker resulting in less buoyant flow. 
Consequently, given the absence of a common understanding of the relevant velocity, the buoyant velocity is 
considered to be not determined in this paper. Given this uncertainty, 35 cm/s could be considered to be a 
conservatively high estimate of the buoyant 1-g velocity. Since the lunar velocity is also not known, extrapolating to 
zero flow would give a conservative estimate of the limit. Extrapolating the worst-case 95% confidence interval slope 
from the data for each material (Table 2) from the presumed 1-g buoyant velocity of 35 cm/s to zero would give a 
conservative 1-g to lunar-g flammability delta that could be applied to other test methods. These values are tabulated 
in Table 2. The worst-case delta for these materials can be seen to be 2.3%. 
The Beefy-T smoldering data are included because the NASA emphasis is on complete extinction, however since 
smoldering is a surface reaction rather than a gas-phase flame, the Damköhler number blow-off limit would not be 
expected to be applicable.  However, it is clear in figure 10 that the extinction shows similar flow dependence. 
 
Figure 13: Comparison of the Nomex and Polycarbonate data with the opposed flow data of Takahashi16 
and the polycarbonate and Nomex data with corresponding data of Takahashi. Closed symbols are from 
this work and open symbols are Takahashi16 the colors identify the material. The closed symbols at ~25 cm/s are 
the centrifuge data. The predictions are developed as described above with the PMMA and P213 grouped together 
since both are forms of PMMA. 

=== PAGE 11 ===
11 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
Figures 11 and 12 present the extinction data for polycarbonate and Nomex Velcro. For both of these materials, 
the lunar-g buoyant extinction is at substantially higher oxygen concentrations that the WSTF data. One possible 
explanation for this is that the quench boundary for these materials shift to higher velocities than seen in the lunar-g 
tests, putting the lunar-gravity tests on the quenching (HTL) branch. This shift of the HTL could be attributed to 
increased radiative loss (Eq. 8) resulting from higher pyrolysis temperatures. This mechanism was suggested by 
Takahashi16 who saw similar behavior for several high temperature materials in downward spread. This mechanism 
merits additional study as it suggests that high temperature materials may not exhibit enhanced flammability at lunar-
g. This would be significant because most of the candidate materials for enhanced oxygen use are higher pyrolysis 
temperature materials. In addition, this behavior requires additional study because there may still be a flammability 
enhancement at Martian-g levels since Martian buoyant flows may still be on the blow-off (CKL) branch.   
IV. Conclusion 
Comparative testing in 1-g under forced flow and buoyant flow at lunar-g conditions has demonstrated that for 
some materials, there is a clear increased flammability at lunar gravity conditions. Other, higher temperature materials 
may show decreased flammability at lunar conditions than would be predicted from 1-g testing. This suggests that 
increased flammability at lunar conditions may not be a universal issue, however further research is needed to validate 
this possibility. At Martian g-levels, the buoyant flow will be higher and increased flammability is possible for 
materials that do not exhibit it at lunar-g levels. 
Acknowledgments 
The authors would like to acknowledge the support of the testing teams at the NASA GRC Zero-Gravity facility 
and the NASA WSTF.  The support of the NASA Engineering and Safety Center (NESC) and the Mars Campaign 
Office are gratefully acknowledged. 
References 
[1] NASA STD 6001 NASA-STD-6001B Flammability, Offgassing, and Compatibility Requirements and Test Procedures, 
National Aeronautics and Space Administration. Washington, DC, 2011. 
[2] Sacksteder, K.R., and T'ien, J. S., “Buoyant Downward Diffusion Flame Spread and Extinction in Partial Gravity 
Accelerations,” Twenty-Fifth Symposium (International) on Combustion, The Combustion Institute, Pittsburgh, PA, 1994, pp. 
1685-1692.   
[3] Ferkul, P.V., and Olson, S.L., "Zero-gravity centrifuge used for the evaluation of material flammability in lunar gravity." 
Journal of Thermophysics and Heat Transfer Vol. 25, no. 3, 2011, pp. 457-461. 
[4] NASA-STD-3001, Volume 2, Revision D, Nasa Spaceflight Human-System Standard, Volume 2: Human Factors, 
Habitability, And Environmental Health, National Aeronautics and Space Administration. Washington, DC, 2011. 
[5] Foutch, D.W., and T’ien, J.S., “Extinction of a Stagnation-Point Diffusion Flame at Reduced Gravity,” AIAA Journal, Vol. 
25, No. 7, 1987, pp. 972-976.  
[6] Olson, Sandra L., Ferkul, Paul V., and T'ien, James S., “Near-Limit Flame Spread Over a Thin Solid Fuels in Microgravity,” 
Twenty-Second Symposium (International) on Combustion, The Combustion Institute, Pittsburgh, PA, 1988, pp.1213-1222.  
[7] Fernandez-Pello, A. C. "The solid phase," Combustion Fundamentals of Fire, 1995, pp. 31-100. 
Table 2 Flammability Compensation Factors 
 
Extinction Limit Slope for Oxygen 
Concentration Versus Flow Rate 
 
Best Fit Slope 
(s/cm) 
95% 
Confidence 
Interval Slope (s/cm) 
∆O2% (at 35 cm/s) for 95% 
Confidence Interval 
PMMA 
0.00022 
0.00056 
1.9 
Polycarbonate 
0.00040 
0.00065 
2.3 
Nomex Velcro 
0.000016 
0.000090 
0.32 
P 213 
0.00030 
0.00040 
1.4 
Beefy-T (flaming) 
0.00017 
0.00023 
0.82 
Beefy-T (smolder) 
0.00034 
0.00050 
1.8 

=== PAGE 12 ===
12 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
[8] Thomsen, M., Fernandez-Pello, C., Urban, D.L., and Olson, S., “Extinction of Opposed Flame Spread Over Thin Solids”, 
13th Mediterranean Combustion Symposium, Corfu, Greece, June 1-5, 2025. 
[9] Ito, A. and Kashiwagi, T.,. “Characterization of flame spread over PMMA using holographic interferometry sample 
orientation effects, “ Combustion and Flame, Vol. 71 No 2., 1988 pp.189-204. 
[10] Urban, D.L., Ferkul, P.V.,  Olson, S.L., Ruff, G.A., Easton, J., James, J.S., Liao, Y.T., Li, C., Fernandez-Pello, C., Torero, 
J.L., Legros, G., Eigenbrod, C., Smirnov, N., Fujita, O., Rouvreau, S., Toth, B., Jomaas, G., "Flame spread: Effects of Microgravity 
and Scale," Combustion and Flame, Vol. 199, 2019, pp. 168-182. 
[11] Niioka, T., “Ignition time in the stretched-flow field, ”   18th Symposium (International) on Combustion, 1981 pp. 1807-
1813. 
[12] ASTM E 1321 ASTM. Test Method for Determining Material Ignition and Flame Spread Properties, ASTM E 1321. 
ASTM International: Conshohocken, PA. 
[13] Quintiere, J. G., "A theoretical basis for flammability properties." Fire and Materials: An International Journal Vol. 30, 
No. 3, 2006, pp. 175-214. 
[14] Hirsch, D., Motto, S., Hshieh, F.Y., and Beeson, H., "Limiting Conditions for Flammability of Polymers," SAE 
Transactions, 2004, pp. 370-373. 
[15] Martinka, J., Balog, K., Chrebet, T., Hroncová, E., and Dibdiaková, J., "Effect of oxygen concentration and temperature 
on ignition time of polypropylene," Journal of Thermal Analysis and Calorimetry,  Vol. 110, No. 1, 2012, pp. 485-487. 
[16]Takahashi, S., Terashima, K., bin Borhan, M.A.F., and Kobayashi, Y., "Relationship Between Blow-Off Behavior and 
Limiting Oxygen Concentration in Microgravity Environments of Flame Retardant Materials." Fire Technology, Vol. 56, 2020, 
pp. 169-183. 
[17] Niioka, T., Takahashi, M. and Izumikawa, M., “Gas-phase ignition of a solid fuel in a hot stagnation-point flow,” 
Symposium (International) on Combustion, Vol. 18, pp. 741-747, 1981. 
[18] “Plastics — Determination of Burning Behaviour by Oxygen Index —Part 4: High gas velocity test,” International 
Standard, ISO 4589-4:2021(E), Geneva, Switzerland. 
[19] Lojo, A.Z., Sharma, A., Liao, Y.T., Johnston, M.C., and Ferkul, P.V., "A Numerical Study of Liquid Fuel Wick Flames 
in Artificial Partial Gravity in a Centrifuge Facility," 51st International Conference on Environmental Systems, 2022. 
[20] Thomsen, Maria, Carlos Fernandez-Pello, David L. Urban, and Gary A. Ruff. "On simulating the effect of gravity on 
concurrent flame spread over thin paper through variations in ambient pressure." Combustion and Flame Vol. 232, 2021,  111538. 
[21] 
Fernandez-Pello, C., Ray, S.R., Glassman, I., “Flame Spread in an Opposed Forced Flow: The Effect of Ambient 
Oxygen Concentration,” Symposium (International) on Combustion, Vol. 18, pp. 579–589, 1981. 
[22] 
Fereres, S., Fernandez-Pello, C., Urban, D.L., Ruff, G.A., “Identifying the Roles of Reduced Gravity and Pressure on 
the Piloted Ignition of Solid Combustibles,” Combust Flame, Vol. 162, pp. 1136–1143, 2015.  
[23] 
DuPont, Technical Guide for NOMEX Brand Fiber, 2001. 
[24] 
Siddiqui, M.N., Redhwi, H.H., Antonakou, E.V., Achilias, D.S., “Pyrolysis Mechanism and Thermal Degradation 
Kinetics of Poly(Bisphenol A Carbonate)-Based Polymers Originating in Waste Electric and Electronic Equipment”, J Anal Appl 
Pyrolysis Vol. 132, 2018, pp. 123–133.  
[25] 
Walters, R.N., Hackett, S.M., Lyon, R.E., “Heats of Combustion of High Temperature Polymers,” Fire and materials, 
2000, Vol. 24, No. 5, pp.245-252. 
