
=== PAGE 1 ===
55th International Conference on Environmental Systems 
ICES-2026-324 
12-16 July 2026, Rio Grande, Puerto Rico 
Surface Vehicle Atmospheric Considerations for Moon to 
Mars Exploration 
Brian K. Alpert1 
NASA Johnson Space Center, Houston, TX, 77058, USA 
Logan Kennedy2 
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, AL, 35808, USA 
L. Daren Welsh3 
The Aerospace Corporation, Chantilly, VA, 20151, USA 
Adam Young4 
HX5 LLC, Fort Walton Beach, FL, 32548, USA 
Gregory L. Mercer5 and Daniel S. Baird6 
NASA Communications Services (NCS), Huntsville, AL, 35816, USA 
NASA and its Artemis commercial providers are continuing to address and mitigate 
flammability concerns at planned vehicle atmospheres on the lunar surface. Challenges 
include close integration between materials flammability, ignition control, fire mitigation, 
human physiology and performance, and spacesuit mobility and performance. Past NASA 
recommendations for vehicle atmospheres identified some of these challenges as open work, 
but they were not funded through completion. In winter 2022, NASA created a team dedicated 
to this problem, including all relevant stakeholders, to develop a strategy to quantify the 
integrated issue, reduce the severity of its impacts, and, if needed, provide alternative options 
to 
program 
management. 
This 
paper 
outlines 
key 
discussions, 
assumptions, 
interdependencies, analysis, and testing that led to the exploration atmosphere team’s findings 
and recommendation of an optimized vehicle atmosphere and approach for early surface 
missions. These efforts not only shape the path to flight certification for those surface missions, 
but will improve the development and certification processes through updated materials 
flammability standards, vehicle configuration constraints, fire barrier effectiveness, ignition 
guidelines, and partial gravity impacts on flammability. Additionally, recent vehicle and 
spacesuit design efforts have allowed the team to challenge long-standing norms and 
assumptions to potentially provide more mission flexibility through improved fire 
suppression, elevated spacesuit operating pressures, and advanced vehicle environmental 
control systems. The team has also identified areas where standards or guidelines are 
insufficient for cumulative mission decompression sickness risk and partial gravity 
compensation factors. These efforts will lay the groundwork for future surface elements and 
missions to follow a similar process, reducing development time and flammability risk while 
providing clear guidance on a path to certification. 
 
1 EHP Syncronization Focal, HLS SE&I, JSC-XE2. 
2 EHP Suit Focal, HLS SE&I, MSFC-LP10. 
3 Test Manager, EHP SE&I, JSC-DI. 
4 Surface Mission Segment Lead, HLS SE&I, GRC-LSA0. 
5 Strategic Communication, ESDMD SAO, HQ-BA0. 
6 Strategic Communication, ESDMD SAO, HQ-BA0. 

=== PAGE 2 ===
2 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
Acronyms and Nomenclature 
Atmosphere = composition of gasses inside a habitable volume or spacesuit 
Prebreathe 
= time spent in a higher oxygen concentration to reduce the dissolved nitrogen in the human body and 
avoid decompression sickness before an extravehicular activity 
Shuttle 
 
= Space Shuttle 
Station 
 
= International Space Station 
Station Suit 
= ISS/Shuttle Extravehicular Mobility Unit 
 
EHP 
 
= Extravehicular Activity and Human Surface Mobility Program 
ESDMD  
= Exploration Systems Development Mission Directorate 
EVA 
 
= Extravehicular Activity 
HLS 
 
= Human Landing System Program 
ISS 
 
= International Space Station 
kPa 
 
= Kilopascals 
MOC 
 
=  Maximum Oxygen Concentration 
NASA 
 
= National Aeronautics and Space Administration 
NESC 
 
= NASA Engineering Safety Center 
psi 
 
= Pounds per square inch 
SAO 
 
= Strategy and Architecture Office 
SCUBA  
= Self-contained Underwater Breathing Apparatus 
SE&I 
 
= Systems Engineering and Integration 
xEMU 
 
= Exploration Extravehicular Mobility Unit  
 
 
 
 

=== PAGE 3 ===
3 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
I. Introduction 
 safe, breathable atmosphere — the gasses inside a habitable volume or spacesuit — is an essential component 
of human spaceflight. Astronauts require breathable air while living and working in spacecraft and while 
venturing onto planetary surfaces during extravehicular activities. Maintaining a safe atmosphere is one of the most 
important functions of an environmental control and life support system. 
At sea level on Earth, the atmosphere exerts an average pressure of 14.7 pounds per square inch (psi, 101.3 kPa). 
The air is made up of approximately 78% nitrogen, 21% oxygen, and small amounts of other gasses [1]. Spaceflight 
systems maintain various pressures and gas ratios (primarily defined by oxygen concentration) to meet their specific 
needs. 
For example, the International Space Station (referred to as “station” throughout this paper) maintains an 
atmosphere similar to sea level, but the station’s EVA suits operate under significantly less pressure and use 
exclusively oxygen. The reduced pressure makes astronaut mobility easier (i.e., by reducing the pressure differential 
with the vacuum of space), but that reduced pressure would not be habitable without the oxygen-rich environment. A 
higher oxygen concentration also increases fire risk (see the discussion of flammability below) therefore spacesuits 
use special materials and limit ignition sources to mitigate this risk. 
NASA is currently evaluating the trade space for atmospheres across many different systems, all of which must 
work together to enable humans' exploration of the Moon and Mars. Selecting atmospheres and developing associated 
procedures (e.g., prebreathe protocols) requires the agency to balance a series of trade-offs to maximize safety and 
operational flexibility. 
NASA Artemis requirements for sustained missions are targeting an average pressure of 8.2 psi (56.5 kPa) and a 
34% oxygen concentration as one solution to those trade-offs. As discussed below, less is known about oxygen 
concentrations above 30% oxygen, leading to flammability concerns such that NASA teams have alternatively 
performed testing utilizing a vehicle atmopshere that stays below 30% (average pressure of 9.6 psi (66.2 kPa) and a 
28.5% oxygen concentration) [2]. 
II. Key Factors 
Vehicle and suit atmospheres must balance several key factors: crew physiology, spacesuit mobility, EVA 
duration, and flammability. Each affects the crew’s health, safety, and ability to achieve exploration objectives. 
A. Flammability 
Fire is one of the many hazards of spaceflight. Different atmospheric conditions can affect flammability; materials 
that might not be flammable under sea-level conditions could present a hazard at different pressures or oxygen 
concentrations. For example, the Apollo 1 fire was exacerbated by the increased flammability of materials inside the 
command module under its high-pressure, pure-oxygen atmosphere [3]. Generally, higher oxygen concentrations 
and/or higher oxygen partial pressures equate to a higher flammability risk. While the International Space Station 
operates around 21% oxygen, historically materials used onboard have been tested up to a maximum oxygen 
concentration (MOC) of 30% at sea level pressure to account for life support system control, error bands, etc [4]. As 
oxygen concentrations increase beyond 30% (or as partial pressure increases), some materials are less likely to pass 
A
 
Figure 1.  Graphical representation of sea level atmosphere and an example lunar surface vehicle atmosphere. 

=== PAGE 4 ===
4 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
testing since they become more flammable. Materials to be used in the 34% atmosphere, have typically been tested  
up to a 37% oxygen concentration for the reasons mentioned above. 
The desired atmosphere and materials used in the construction of spaceflight systems inform one another, with 
engineers balancing varying needs to create the safest possible environment. If a certain oxygen concentration or 
partial pressure is desirable, this may constrain materials selection. The selected atmosphere also dictates fire 
prevention and mitigation systems (i.e., ignition control and fire suppression). 
NASA and its partners are investigating new materials (such as textiles) that are safer in a range of oxygen 
concentrations, which presents a variety of technical challenges. Even with better materials, flammability remains a 
concern when operating in high oxygen environments and will drive many EVA and spacecraft atmosphere design 
considerations, requirements, and operational procedures. 
The reduced gravity on the lunar surface presents a unique challenge with respect to fire characteristics, such as 
extinguishment and propagation. A flame can extinguish if the cabin airflow is high enough that the reactants don’t 
have time to react while the mixture is hot enough. This effect occurs more readily on Earth because the higher gravity 
causes higher flow velocities. Thus, a material that self-extinguishes in Earth gravity may continue to burn in lunar 
gravity. Additionally, since airflow is needed to sustain a minimum oxygen concentration for propagation, a 
smouldering flame in microgravity may not propogate in the absence of cabin ventilation. A smouldering flame in  
lunar gravity, however, might have sufficient natural airflow to promote the additional oxygen concentration needed 
to propagate [5]. 
B. Crew Physiology 
A spacecraft or spacesuit must keep crew members safe and healthy for the duration of their mission, including 
providing enough oxygen and managing exhaled gasses like carbon dioxide. Oxygen is essential to the human body, 
while excessive carbon dioxide can be toxic. However, even oxygen requires the right balance; too little oxygen can 
cause hypoxia, while too much oxygen can cause oxygen toxicity. If nitrogen is present in the vehicle atmosphere, it 
can cause decompression sickness so it is advantageous to remove as much of it as possible from the body 
(denitrogenation) before performing an EVA. 
Currently, 
NASA 
standards 
for 
oxygen partial pressure limit how hypoxic 
the atmosphere can be for crew operation. 
The standards are based on historical 
flight and test data; however, the data is 
limited and does not attempt to quantify 
degradation of health or performance 
from extended hypoxia exposure or 
adjusted hypoxia limits. The NASA 
community 
is 
actively 
performing 
research to further explore acceptable 
hypoxia limits. 
A 
spacecraft 
or 
spacesuit’s 
environmental control and life support 
system must control the above factors to 
maintain crew safety and comfort. 
Spaceflight systems must also control, 
among other parameters, the rates of 
pressure changes, as rapid changes in 
pressure can cause physiological damage, 
including to the ears and lungs. 
C. Operational Timeline 
Unlike recent objectives on station expeditions, where the goal is to enable science (which is largely conducted 
inside the vehicle) and EVAs are utilized mostly for replacements and repairs, the primary goal of a surface mission 
is to perform EVAs. While the majority of task durations on an EVA day are defined independently of the vehicle 
(private medical conferences, sleep, battery charging and configuring of suits and tools), the EVA preparation time 
includes prebreathe (the denitrogenation protocol mentioned above) which depends on vehicle atmosphere, oxygen 
saturation levels, etc [6]. Prebreathe gives the body time to expel dissolved nitrogen to help avoid decompression 
 
Figure 2.  Engineers test lunar spacesuits being developed by 
Axiom Space in the Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory at NASA’s 
Johnson Space Center in Houston [14]. 

=== PAGE 5 ===
5 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
sickness (colloquially known to SCUBA divers as “the bends”). Symptoms of decompression sickness can range from 
minor joint pain to neurological damage [7]. Lower vehicle pressures can reduce prebreathe time by reducing the 
initial amount of dissolved nitrogen in the body but they usually require higher oxygen concentrations (higher 
flammability risk) to prevent hypoxia. Minimizing prebreathe time will directly lead to more EVA time.  
D. Suit Mobility 
Spacesuits often use a different atmosphere than spacecraft and habitation systems. Higher atmospheric pressures 
make spacesuits more rigid (i.e., less flexible and more physically demanding to operate), require stronger brackets 
and other hardware to increase material strength (and mass), and increase wear and tear on hardware. For this reason, 
it is beneficial to operate spacesuits at the lowest possible pressure. To avoid hypoxia mentioned earlier, these lower 
pressure spacesuits must operate at higher oxygen concentrations. 
Spacesuits worn by Apollo astronauts operated at a pressure of 3.75 psi (25.8 kPa) and 100% oxygen. The 
Extravehicular Mobility Unit used during the Space Shuttle program and aboard the International Space Station 
(referred to as “Station Suit” throughout this paper) maintains a pressure of 4.3 psi (29.6 kPa), while the Russian-made 
Orlan spacesuit, also used aboard the space station, maintains a slightly higher pressure of 5.7 psi (39.2 kPa). Both 
systems operate with a 100% oxygen atmosphere [8]. 
Higher suit pressures operating with this 100% oxygen atmosphere can reduce prebreathe time by reducing the 
amount of nitrogen that crew members must expel, thus also enabling longer EVA durations, but they also reduce suit 
flexibility and mobility. Data from suited EVA performance testing, repeated at multiple suit pressures, can inform a 
cost function characterizing the impact of suit pressure increase to crew workload, fatigue, and task duration. This 
cost function can be compared to the prebreathe protocol options, informing a risk trade. Spacesuit engineers and 
mission planners must strike a careful balance between the risk of decompression sickness, the operational burden of 
prebreathe, and suit mobility. 
NASA and its commercial partners are currently developing and testing the Exploration Extravehicular Mobility 
Unit (xEMU) spacesuit for Artemis missions. NASA is testing the xEMU’s performance using a variety of 
atmospheres, between 4.3 psi (29.6 kPa) to 8.2 psi (56.5 kPa) [9]. Future spacesuits designed for EVAs on planetary 
bodies have different mobility requirements than spacesuits designed only for microgravity. The design and 
atmosphere considerations may also vary by destination (i.e., EVAs on Mars may have different mobility requirements 
than lunar EVAs.) 
III. Considerations for Moon to Mars Exploration 
The Moon to Mars Architecture includes many human-rated systems, such as the Orion spacecraft, the Human 
Landing System, the Pressurized Rover, spacesuits, and surface habitats. These elements bring together many different 
providers and partners. To explore the Moon, including building a Moon Base, and journey to Mars, astronauts will 
need to be able to work seamlessly across different elements, creating the need for compatible atmospheres. 
A. Atmosphere Transition Considerations 
Spacecraft that dock or berth in cislunar space, like the Orion spacecraft, Gateway, and the Human Landing 
System, must be able to maintain similar atmospheres to enable crew to transition between them. Similarly, habitation 
assets on the lunar surface will need to maintain suitable atmospheres to enable astronauts to transition to spacesuits 
for EVAs. 
 
Figure 3.  Graphical representation of Apollo spacesuit atmosphere and Station US spacesuit atmosphere. 

=== PAGE 6 ===
6 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
The transition between different systems and 
atmospheres is an operational consideration the 
architecture must address. As mentioned above, a 
prebreathe period is usually needed to prepare for an 
EVA, with the prebreathe duration depending upon the 
magnitude of the difference in atmospheres between 
spacecraft and spacesuit. 
Because surface assets may operate at different 
atmospheres and EVA cadences will vary, there is no 
one-size-fits-all 
prebreathe 
protocol. 
A 
lengthy 
prebreathe period can limit EVA opportunities; a short 
prebreathe enabled by higher suit pressures can increase 
the risk of crew fatigue and injury. NASA aims to 
minimize prebreathe time to maximize astronaut 
utilization opportunities (e.g., conducting science or 
technology demonstrations while EVA) while ensuring 
crew safety [10]. 
Ultimately, NASA would like to develop protocols 
similar to those outlined on SCUBA dive tables, which 
help divers calculate safe dive depths and times that 
minimize the risk of decompression sickness. The 
development of this DCS risk estimation tool is known 
as the Aerospace Estimation Tool for Hypobaric 
Exposure Risk (AETHER) [11]. This approach would 
outline a suite of safe pressures, oxygen concentrations, and prebreathe times to help astronauts and mission controllers 
plan EVAs that meet a variety of exploration needs. Decompression sickness is a complex event that combines the 
presence of a gas phase in the tissues (venous gas emboli) with human perception of pain. Therefore, probabilistic 
models about decompression sickness and presence of venous gas emboli require a large amount of test data to validate 
those models [12].  
B. System Design Considerations 
Atmosphere requirements also have flow-down effects on overall system design and pre-flight testing. In an 
architecture that uses multiple systems (e.g., launch vehicles, landing vehicles, habitation modules) built by different 
providers, ensuring  compatible atmospheres will be a key design concern. Spacecraft will need to monitor and adjust 
gas ratios to maintain the desired balance. Improvements to accuracy and reliability of spacecraft ECLSS sensors and 
gas injection can result in smaller oxygen concentration excursions which could decrease the boundaries for material 
flammability testing (i.e., more materials might pass). Maximum pressure requirements can also affect the design and 
mass of a system’s structures. 
Spacesuit pressures will also need to balance prebreathe requirements with factors such as astronaut fatigue, 
mobility, and suit life cycle (i.e., wear and tear on the spacesuit). These architectural considerations, including the 
characteristics of the intended destinations, will dictate many design choices. 
Another factor for system design consideration should be commonality among multi-system architectures, where 
practical. System design and operational choices made independently, such as atmosphere set points, resulting pre-
breathe protocols, and even fire mitigations, could result in additional mission operational complexity in terms of crew 
and ground operator training. 
C. Operational Considerations 
NASA has extensive experience with microgravity spacewalks (e.g., in low Earth orbit). Engineers and mission 
planners have a thorough understanding of human physiological responses in these conditions and use atmospheres 
that maximize comfort, health, and safety. 
 
Figure 4.  Example dive table from the U.S. Navy 
Diving Manual [13]. SCUBA divers use dive charts like 
this one to plan for safe dives given considerations include 
water pressure, dive time, and tank air mixture. (Credit: 
U.S. Navy) 

=== PAGE 7 ===
7 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
NASA has far less operational 
experience in partial gravity (i.e., only 
from the lunar landings of the 1960s and 
1970s). As the agency gains more 
practical experience in partial gravity, 
atmospheres (e.g., for the Human Landing 
System, spacesuits) may change to 
optimize for the effects of partial gravity 
on the human body and surface assets. 
D. Mars-Forward Considerations 
While many lunar systems are 
extensible 
to 
Mars 
exploration, 
environmental differences between the 
two planetary bodies may prompt design 
differences. 
Operating 
in 
Mars’s 
atmosphere, which exerts less pressure 
than Earth’s atmosphere but more than the 
Moon’s vacuum conditions, may call for 
different 
atmospheres 
in 
habitation 
systems and spacesuits. Flame blow-off 
factors will be different in martian gravity 
and the on-back mass and center of 
gravity of the spacesuit with have an even 
more pronounced impact on crew fatigue 
during spacewalks. 
IV. Conclusion 
There is no one-size-fits-all solution for vehicle and suit atmospheres. Realizing a multi-partner architecture that 
minimizes risk and maximizes utilization time requires NASA to develop robust, flexible systems that can operate in 
and interface with a variety of systems. Rather than the agency dictating specific atmospheres or setting operational 
requirements, it is imperative that NASA awards contracts and adjudicates standards with their providers with this 
flexibility in mind. 
As the agency grows its experience in partial gravity operations, it will refine its approaches and this knowledge 
gain will enable an enduring presence at the Moon Base and humanity’s first journeys to Mars. 
A. Early Artemis architectures 
For the first missions to land astronauts on the Moon in over 40 years, NASA and its Artemis commercial providers 
are developing multiple architecture options to enable surface EVAs. 
 
 
 
Figure 5.  Astronauts Practice Next Giant Leap for Artemis. NASA 
astronaut Doug “Wheels” Wheelock and Axiom Space astronaut Peggy 
Whitson test the mobility of Artemis spacesuits conducting movements 
and tasks similar to those necessary during lunar surface exploration on 
Artemis missions [15]. 

=== PAGE 8 ===
8 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
 
Utilizing the variables in Table 1, NASA has evaluated multiple prebreathe protocols for use on the early Artemis 
missions 
 
 
B. Key Takeaways 
• 
Vehicle and suit atmospheres are a key factor for crew health and safety, providing the gas mixture that 
crew members breathe. When selecting an atmosphere, NASA must consider risks like fire and 
decompression sickness, while maximizing spacesuit mobility and EVA duration. 
• 
Exploration systems will need to provide safe and compatible atmospheres, enabling crew members to 
live and work in space while transitioning between elements. 
• 
While NASA has a great deal of experience in microgravity, operating in a partial gravity environments 
like on the Moon to Mars may have different effects on human physiology that the agency must 
understand. 
• 
NASA will manage atmospheres for the Artemis campaign and Mars missions based on many 
considerations and trade-offs, including exercising flexibility to use a range of atmospheres for different 
use cases. 
 
 
 
 
* A PiO2 of 2.22 psi is being evaluated as a mildly hypoxic atmosphere but is not yet approved. 
† A suit pressure of 5.2 psi is being evaluated as an elevated suit pressure but is not yet approved. 
‡ The Architecture 1 protocol is based on modeling and indirect testing, but has not yet been tested. 
Table 1. Early Artemis mission architecture variables related to surface EVAs. 
Vehicle Atmospheric Variables 
Option 1 
Option 2 
Vehicle Pressure 
8.2 psi 
9.6 psi 
Vehicle MOC 
37% 
30% 
 
Physiological Variables 
Option 1 
Option 2 
Partial Pressure of Inspired Oxygen 
2.46 psi 
2.22 psi* 
 
 
Suit Atmosphereic Variables 
Option 1 
Option 2 
Suit Pressure 
4.3 psi 
5.2 psi† 
 
Table 2. Early Artemis mission architecture examples. 
 
Vehicle Pressure 
Vehicle MOC 
PiO2 
Suit Pressure 
Prebreathe Time 
Architecture 1 
8.2 psi 
37% 
2.46 psi 
4.3 psi 
~50 min‡ 
Architecture 2 
9.6 psi 
30% 
2.46 psi 
5.2 psi 
~50 min 
 

=== PAGE 9 ===
9 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
Acknowledgments 
The authors would like to recognize the work of the Exploration Atmosphere Issue Resolution Team members. 
Since the winter of 2022, this team has worked with NASA commercial providers Axiom, Blue Origin, SpaceX, 
international partner ESA, and the NASA Engineering Safety Center (NESC). Together they reviewed historical 
lessons learned and identified key process updates and design trades needed to make NASA’s return to the lunar 
surface successful, while safely maximizing the duration of EVAs. 
References 
 
[1]  National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, "The Atmosphere," 2 July 2024. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.noaa.gov/jetstream/atmosphere. [Accessed 3 March 2026]. 
[2]  C. Anchondo, P. Masi and C. Briggs, "Creating the Test Environment for Exploration Habitats," in 53rd International 
Conference on Environmental Systems, Louisville, KY, ICES-2024-128.  
[3]  National Aeronautics and Space Administration, "Report of Apollo 204 Review Board," 5 April 1967. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.nasa.gov/wp-content/uploads/static/history/Apollo204/summary.pdf. [Accessed 3 March 2026]. 
[4]  D. Hirsch, "An Approach to the Flammability Testing of Aerospace Materials," NASA Technical Reports Server, 
20120010633, 2012. 
[5]  E. Johnson and P. Ferkul, Interviewees, and G. Jordan, Interviewer, "Moon Material Flammability," Houston We Have A 
Podcast, 23 May 2025. [Podcast].Available: https://www.nasa.gov/podcasts/houston-we-have-a-podcast/moon-material-
flammability. [Accessed 1 May 2026]. 
[6]  National Aeronautics and Space Administration, "APPENDIX H: Human Landing System Attachment A01 HLS Con Ops 
v1.0 
Release 
1.3," 
1 
May 
2020. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://sam.gov/workspace/contract/opp/7e3ad9e2ec964008a7f419ae8a8511a4/view. [Accessed 4 March 2026]. 
[7]  NASA, "Decompression Sickness (DCS) Risk Mitigation," OCHMO-TB-037, Rev C, 2023. 
[8]  K. Lange, B. Duffield, F. Jeng and P. Campbell, "Exploration Spacecraft and Space Suit Internal Atmosphere Pressure and 
Composition," in 2005 Bioastronautics Investigator''s Workshop, Galveston, TX, 2005.  
[9]  National Aeronautics and Space Administration, "Exploration Extravehicular Mobility Unit (xEMU)," 7 October 2019. 
[Online]. Available: https://www.nasa.gov/image-article/exploration-extravehicular-mobility-unit-xemu/. [Accessed 3 
March 2026]. 
[10] S. McFarland, D. Campbell and R. Rhodes, "NASA Advanced Space Suit Pressure Garment System Status and Development 
Priorities 2025," in 54th International Conference on Environmental Systems, Prague, Czech Republic, ICES-2025-385.  
[11] NASA, "CO2 Chamber Services - 80NSSC25913595Q," SAM.gov, 2025. 
[12] J. Conkin, "Probability of Decompression Sickness and Venous Gas Emboli from 49 NASA Hypobaric Chamber Tests with 
Reference to Exploration Atmosphere," National Aeronautics and Space Administration, NASA/TP-2020-220529. 
[13] U.S. Navy, "U.S. Navy Diving Manual, Revision 7," Commander, Naval Sea Systems Command, 2016. 
[14] National 
Aeronautics 
and 
Space 
Administration, 
"Twitter," 
8 
July 
2025. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://x.com/NASA_Johnson/status/1942709546977567116/photo/1. [Accessed 3 March 2026]. 
[15] SpaceX, "Astronauts Practice Next Giant Leap for Artemis," NASA Image and Video Library, 5 March 2024. [Online]. 
Available: https://images.nasa.gov/details/hls-crew-elevator-demo-20240503-dsc00138. [Accessed 3 March 2026]. 
 
