
=== PAGE 1 ===
MATERIAL FLAMMABILITY AT LUNAR AND MARTIAN GRAVITY. Paul Ferkul,1 Nathan Kralik2, and 
Ya-Ting Liao2 
1Universities Space Research Association, NASA Glenn Research Center, 21000 Brookpark Rd., Cleveland, OH 
44135, paul.ferkul@nasa.gov) 2Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH. 
 
 
Introduction: NASA relies on NASA-STD-6001B 
Test 1 for screening material flammability for flight 
[1].  The test is conducted in normal Earth gravity, 
with the assumption that if a material passes the 1-g 
test, then it is considered safe for spaceflight.  This 
approach has provided a practical means to assess the 
great number of materials that are used currently, and 
which have been used in the past.  But the approach 
has important uncertainties.  Microgravity research 
over the last few decades has shown that normal 
gravity may not necessarily represent the most 
flammable condition for a material.  Theoretical and 
experimental results have demonstrated that some 
materials that will not burn in 1-g will burn in 0-g 
(with a low-speed flow) or in partial gravity (such as 
Lunar-g).   
This can be understood by examining the role of 
buoyant flow on flame spread.  On Earth, buoyancy 
causes hot product gases to accelerate upwards and out 
of the flame, at the same time drawing fresh oxidizer 
into the flame base.  This introduction of fresh oxygen 
sustains the flame.  The speed of the air entering the 
flame can be so high, however, that the chemical 
reactions are unable to keep pace.  Furthermore, the 
rate of heat release and/or transport may be too low to 
provide the energy to heat the incoming cold flow.  
These effects can lead to flame de-stabilization, 
commonly known as blowoff.  The governing non-
dimensional parameter is the Damkohler Number, 
which is the ratio of the characteristic flow time to the 
chemical reaction time.  
Consider a material that is marginally non-
flammable on Earth.  The same material may be 
flammable at a lower gravity level (for example, on the 
Moon) since the crucial mechanism of buoyant oxygen 
entrainment at the flame base is still present, but at a 
slower rate, allowing the chemical reaction rates to 
“keep up” and the flame to adequately heat the 
incoming cool air.  Alternatively, a material that is not 
flammable on Earth can be burned in microgravity, but 
with the introduction of a low speed forced flow of air.  
Applying a flow below the buoyant blowoff limit 
speed permits a material to burn in microgravity, albeit 
with a smaller flame size, even though it may not burn 
at all in 1-g.   
Current Knowledge: Using drop towers, aircraft, 
sounding rockets, and modeling, it is observed that 
certain partial-g environments are expected to increase 
the flammability limits for some materials.  Early 
numerical and experimental evidence suggested that 
Lunar gravity could be more hazardous, since flame 
spread rate as a function of gravity peaks there [2].  
Related work suggests that oxygen concentration for 
flammability reaches a minimum value in the vicinity 
of g = g Lunar.   
Furthermore, in order to facilitate the convenient 
donning of space suits, future explorers of the Moon 
and Mars are likely to live in atmospheres at sub-
atmospheric pressure but higher oxygen concentration 
compared to standard air  Consequently, partial-g fire 
in an extraterrestrial habitat is a real hazard that is 
expected to be substantially worse than in 0-g and 
potentially worse than even 1-g.   
Discussion: This work contributes directly to 
filling knowledge and capability gaps in spacecraft fire 
safety that have been the focus of many projects at the 
NASA John H. Glenn Research Center.    NASA has 
undertaken extensive tests examining solid fuel flame 
spread with a particular application to material 
flammability in microgravity culminating in a number 
of flight experiments (e.g., [3-7]).  Partial gravity tests 
can be performed in drop towers [8] and aboard 
aircraft [2], but the available times are too short to 
provide significant flame development (5 s for drop 
tower and ~25 s for aircraft).  For an orbital platform 
such as the International Space Station (ISS), partial 
gravity tests can be performed using centrifuges, but 
those currently available have small radii of rotation 
producing appreciable Coriolis effects for the length 
scales 
necessary, 
adding 
complexity 
to 
the 
interpretation of results.  A sounding rocket utilizing 
vehicle rotation to simulate Lunar gravity provided test 
times on the order of 150 s, burning two different 
materials, but again the Coriolis force introduces 
uncertainty.  
Combustion on the Moon: The first-ever 
combustion experiments on another world will be 
performed, with a planned launch date of late 2026.  
Flammability of Materials on the Moon (FM2) will 
burn a total of four solid fuel samples in quiescent 
habitable atmospheres in actual long duration Lunar 
gravity (Fig. 1).  Cameras will be used to record flame 
characteristics, including spread rate.  Radiometers and 
an oxygen sensor will be included.  The tests will 
provide benchmark data and are part of the larger 

=== PAGE 2 ===
effort to understand how Lunar gravity will affect 
material flammability.   
Direct Lunar access offers the best way to assess 
flammability of materials on the Moon.  An extensive 
materials qualification test series there would be ideal, 
but such tests will need to be put off until an extended 
human presence on the Moon is established.  Prior to 
this, a limited series of tests would enable a 
comparison between fires on the Moon and Earth and 
would validate models and theories developed using 0-
g and 1-g testing. 
 
Figure 1.  Top: FM2 experiment design showing solid 
model and cross section of the combustion chamber.  
Four flat samples are burned in separate tests.  Small, 
pressurized gas bottles provide air for each test.  
Cameras record flame images while sensors include 
thermocouples, radiometers, and O2 concentration.   
Bottom: FM2 Hardware. Left: Chamber exterior; 
Right: Internal components. 
 
The outcome of this work would include the first-
ever, long-duration observation and measurement of 
flame spread in a partial-g environment.  It is expected 
that the fuels tested will provide verification of the 
hypothesis that some materials burning in partial-g 
environments may be more flammable compared to 1-
g.  The results will provide a bridge between the 
current 1-g material screening method and actual 
behavior in reduced gravity.  This will refine 
understanding of the conditions when the test may not 
be conservative enough, and likely will lead to an 
amended test procedure which is safer and more 
accurate.  
References: [1] Mulville, D., "NASA-STD-6001B: 
Flammability, off-gassing, and compatibility require-
ments and test procedures," NASA, 2016. [2] K. R. 
Sacksteder and J. S. T'ien, "Buoyant downward 
diffusion flame spread and extinction in partial-gravity 
accelerations," 
Symposium 
(International) 
on 
Combustion, vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 1685-1692, 1994. [3] 
D. L. Urban, P. Ferkul, S. Olson, G. Ruff, J. Easton, J. 
S. T'ien, Y.-T. T. Liao, C. Li, C. Fernandez-Pello, J. 
Torero, G. Legros, C. Eigenbrod, N. Smirnov, O. 
Fujita, S. Rouvreau, B. Toth and G. Jomaas, "Flame 
spread: effects of microgravity and scale," Combustion 
and Flame, vol. 199, pp. 168-182, 2019. [4] X. Zhao, 
Y.-T. T. Liao, M. C. Johnston, J. S. T'ien, P. V. Ferkul 
and S. L. Olson, "Concurrent flame growth, spread, 
and quenching over composite fabric samples in low 
speed 
purely 
forced 
flow 
in 
microgravity," 
Proceedings of the Combustion Institute, vol. 36, pp. 
2971- 2978, 2017. [5] Bhattacharjee, S., and 
Altenkirch, R.A., “A comparison of theory and 
experiment in flame spread over thin condensed fuel in 
quiescent microgravity environment,” Proc. of the 
Combustion Institute, pp. 1669-1676, 1992. [6] 
Bhattacharjee, S., Altenkirch, R.A., and Sacksteder, 
K., “Implications of spread rate and temperature 
measurement in quiescent, microgravity, space-based 
environment,” Combustion Science and Technology, 
Vol. 91, pp. 225-231, 1993. [7] S. L. Olson and P. V. 
Ferkul, “Microgravity flammability boundary for 
PMMA rods in axial stagnation flow: experimental 
results and energy balance analyses,” Comb. Flame 
180, 2017. [8] P. V. Ferkul and S. L. Olson, "Zero-
gravity centrifuge used for the evaluation of material 
flammability 
in 
Lunar 
gravity," 
Journal 
of 
Thermophysics and Heat Transfer, vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 
457-461, 2011. 
 
 
