
=== PAGE 1 ===
National Aeronautics and Space Administration
A Researcher’s Guide to:
Combustion Science

=== PAGE 2 ===
2
This International Space Station (ISS) Researcher’s Guide is published by 
the NASA ISS Program Science Office.
Authors: 
Suleyman A. Gokoglu, NASA Glenn Research Center
Daniel L. Dietrich, NASA Glenn Research Center
Dennis P. Stocker, NASA Glenn Research Center
Paul V. Ferkul, Universities Space Research Association
Sandy L. Olson, NASA Glenn Research Center
Michael C. Hicks, NASA Glenn Research Center
Executive Editor: Amelia Rai
Technical Editor: Neesha Hosein
Designer: Cory Duke
Cover and back cover: 
a. Spherical flame in microgravity with ethylene flowing from a porous sphere into quiescent air. 
Glowing soot is trapped within the blue hydrocarbon flame, while a bright arc of large soot 
particles can be seen in the foreground. The test was conducted in NASA Glenn’s 2.2-Second 
Drop Tower as a prelude to the Flame Design experiment which is in development for conduct on 
the International Space Station as part of the Advanced Combustion via Microgravity Experiments 
(ACME) project. (Image credit: NASA, ACME project, Flame Design experiment)
b. Candle flames: burning in earth gravity (left) in comparison to one burning in 0-g (right). (Image 
credit: NASA, Candle Flames experiment)
c. A snapshot of 2-cm diameter acrylic sphere burning in microgravity at 17 percent oxygen and 
10 cm/s flow from the Burning and Suppression of Solids (BASS) experiment conducted on the 
International Space Station. Occasional yellowish-red streaks appear as vapor bubbles formed in the 
solid are ignited as they burst through the blue flame. (Image credit: NASA, BASS experiment)

=== PAGE 3 ===
3
Astronaut holding a sample holder with a burned and bubbled acrylic sheet from the Burning and Suppression of Solids (BASS) 
experiment conducted in the Microgravity Science Glovebox on the International Space Station. (Image credit: NASA, BASS 
experiment)
Flying 250 miles above the Earth, the International Space Station (ISS) 
provides a platform for research to improve life on Earth, enable space 
exploration, and understand the universe. This Researcher’s Guide is 
intended to help potential ISS combustion science researchers plan 
experiments utilizing the microgravity environment in order to understand 
how heat and mass transport phenomena coupled with chemistry affect 
combustion behavior and fire safety. It covers the nature of the acceleration 
environment on ISS, available facilities for conducting combustion research, 
examples of previous microgravity investigations, and current combustion 
science and fire safety projects being developed for execution on the ISS.
The Lab is Open
3

=== PAGE 4 ===
4

=== PAGE 5 ===
5
1. Microgravity, or weightlessness, alters many observable phenomena 
within the physical and life sciences. Systems and processes affected by 
microgravity include surface wetting and interfacial tension, multiphase 
flow and heat transfer, multiphase system dynamics, solidification, and 
fire phenomena and combustion. Microgravity induces a vast array of 
changes in organisms ranging from bacteria to humans, including global 
alterations in gene expression and 3-D aggregation of cells into tissue-like 
architecture.
2. Extreme conditions in the ISS environment include exposure to extreme 
heat and cold cycling, ultra-vacuum, atomic oxygen, and high-energy 
radiation. Testing and qualification of materials exposed to these extreme 
conditions have provided data to enable the manufacturing of long-
life, reliable components used on Earth as well as in the world’s most 
sophisticated satellite and spacecraft components.
3. Low-Earth orbit at 51 degrees inclination and at a 90-minute orbit 
affords ISS a unique vantage point with an altitude of approximately 240 
miles (400 kilometers) and an orbital path over 90 percent of the Earth’s 
population. This can provide improved spatial resolution and variable 
lighting conditions compared to the sun-synchronous orbits of typical 
Earth remote-sensing satellites.
Unique Features of the ISS 
Research Environment
1. Microgravity, or weightlessness, alters many observable phenomena 
within the physical and life sciences. Systems and processes affected by 
microgravity include surface wetting and interfacial tension, multiphase 
flow and heat transfer, multiphase system dynamics, solidification, and 
fire phenomena and combustion. Microgravity induces a vast array of 
changes in organisms ranging from bacteria to humans, including global 
alterations in gene expression and 3-D aggregation of cells into tissue-like 
architecture.
2. Extreme conditions in the ISS environment include exposure to extreme 
heat and cold cycling, ultra-vacuum, atomic oxygen, and high-energy 
radiation. Testing and qualification of materials exposed to these extreme 
conditions have provided data to enable the manufacturing of long-
life, reliable components used on Earth as well as in the world’s most 
sophisticated satellite and spacecraft components.
3. Low-Earth orbit at 51 degrees inclination and at a 90-minute orbit 
affords ISS a unique vantage point with an altitude of approximately 240 
miles (400 kilometers) and an orbital path over 90 percent of the Earth’s 
population. This can provide improved spatial resolution and variable 
lighting conditions compared to the sun-synchronous orbits of typical 
Earth remote-sensing satellites.
Unique Features of the ISS 
Research Environment
5

=== PAGE 6 ===
6
The Lab is Open	
3
Unique Features of the ISS Research Environment	
5
Why Conduct Combustion Research in Microgravity?	
8
Results from Past and Recent Research	
11
Droplet Combustion	
11
Flame Extinguishment Experiment (FLEX)	
12
Gaseous Diffusion Flames	
13
Structure & Liftoff In Combustion Experiment (SLICE)	
14
Burning Rate Emulator (BRE)	
15
Coflow Laminar Diffusion Flame (CLD Flame)	
16
Electric-Field Effects on Laminar Diffusion Flames (E-FIELD Flames)	
16
Flame Design	
16
Structure and Response of Spherical Diffusion Flames (s-Flame)	
17
Solid-Fuel Combustion/Material Flammability	
18
Burning and Suppression of Solids (BASS)	
21
Correlation of Flammability between Normal and Microgravity	
22
Fundamentals of Flame Growth and Extinction in Microgravity	
23
Thermal and Species Field Effects on Material Flammability	
23
External Heat Flux Effects on the Ignitability and Suppression of 
    Materials in Microgravity	
24
Narrow Channel as a 1-g Flammability Test Method	
24
Premixed Flames	
25
Fire Safety	
26
Super-Critical Processes	
27
Highlights and Lessons Learned	
30
Flame Existence	
30
Low-Stretch (Low-Velocity) Flames	
31
Jet Flames	
32
Flame Stability	
33
Cool Flames	
33
Ancillary Hardware Developments	
34
Spacecraft Fire Safety	
34
Table of Contents

=== PAGE 7 ===
7
Opportunities for Combustion Research on the ISS	
36
Droplet Combustion	
36
Gaseous Diffusion Flames	
37
Solid-Fuel Combustion/Material Flammability	
38
Premixed Flames	
39
Super-Critical Processes	
40
New Initiatives	
41
Facilities and How to Choose Them	
43
Acceleration Measurement and Environment Characterization	
43
Combustion Integrated Rack (CIR)	
43
Microgravity Science Glovebox (MSG)	
44
Expedite the Processing of Experiments to Space Station (EXPRESS) Racks	
45
Telescience Support Center	
46
Developing and Flying Research on the ISS	
47
What Should Principal Investigators Know About Conducting  
    Research on the ISS?	
48
Funding Opportunities / Points of Contact	
49
Citations	
49
Appendix	
52
Acronyms	
53

=== PAGE 8 ===
8
Combustion occurs when fuel and oxygen react to produce carbon dioxide, water 
and heat. For the foreseeable future, the overwhelming majority of delivered energy 
in terrestrial applications will be from combustion or other chemically reacting 
systems. These energy uses cover the range from electric power and transportation 
to processes directly tied to the delivered material (e.g., glass and steel manufacture). 
These processes produce some of the most important environmental hazards 
currently facing humanity (global climate change, acid gas pollution, mercury 
contamination from coal, and wild-land fires). 
Despite being the subject of active research for over 80 years, combustion processes 
remain one of the most poorly controlled phenomena that have a significant impact 
on human health, comfort and safety. This is because the simplest combustor 
(e.g., kitchen stove) remains beyond our detailed numerical modeling capabilities. 
Typically, the combustion process involves a large number of chemical species 
(hundreds) and reactions (even thousands). It is these species and reactions 
that determine flammability limits (combustor operating ranges) and pollutant 
emissions. Much of combustion research involves developing a comprehensive and 
predictive quantitative understanding of this complex process. This understanding 
usually occurs in smaller, bench-scale experiments that are amenable to detailed 
study and modeling. In these bench-scale experiments, however, buoyant forces, 
created by gravity and the large temperature differential between the flame and 
the ambient gas, dominate and frequently obscure the physical and chemical 
phenomena of interest, and hence, complicate analyses. In the absence of gravity, 
buoyancy can be suppressed, and the analyses can be reduced to much simpler one-
dimensional systems. 
To understand the strong influence of gravity on flames, one can consider the 
density gradients in flames. Typical flame temperatures are on the order of 2,300 
degrees Kelvin, whereas ambient temperatures are approximately 300 degrees 
Kelvin. This produces an eight-fold density change over the scale of a centimeter. 
The resultant density gradient induces a strong velocity field that dominates all but 
the highest flow fields. This flow field causes the flame to lift and point upward. 
The resultant flow instabilities cause the flicker typical of flames on Earth. Figure 1 
contains a gallery of 1-g to 0-g comparison flames.
By varying or eliminating the effects of gravity, we can extract fundamental data 
that are important for understanding combustion systems. This approach has 
been implemented to some extent in existing terrestrial reduced-gravity platforms, 
but the experimental time scales and sizes have been limited. Long-duration 
Why Conduct Combustion 
Research in Microgravity?

=== PAGE 9 ===
9
experiments using realistic sizes are essential for a comprehensive understanding of 
the combustion phenomena and are possible only in the microgravity environments 
offered by space facilities. 
Besides terrestrial applications of combustion, gravity-related combustion research 
issues are also of crucial importance to NASA’s manned and unmanned missions. 
Fire safety is an important operational element of human space exploration 
missions to minimize the likelihood and impact of accidental fires in spacecraft 
and human habitats. The effects of these environmental changes on combustion 
in reduced gravity are unclear and need to be better understood for all mission-
relevant scenarios. Every aspect of fire prevention, detection and suppression is 
Figure 1. 1-g and 0-g comparison flames. Left to right, top to bottom: ethane jet flames, ethylene jet flames, candle 
flames, burning heptane droplets and flame spread over a butanol pool. (Image credit: NASA)

=== PAGE 10 ===
10
fundamentally different in space than on Earth. Thus, an improved knowledge of 
combustion in reduced gravity is essential to adapt fire safety concepts and systems 
to the more stringent conditions of the space environment. 
Benefits of conducting combustion research in microgravity can thus be 
summarized as: 
• Removal of the complex interaction between the buoyant flow and the energy 
feedback to the flame.
• Realistic simulation of the fire risk seen in manned spacecraft.
• Practical simulation of the gravitational environment seen for reacting systems 
in future spacecraft. 

=== PAGE 11 ===
11
Over the past two decades, microgravity combustion research has focused primarily 
on increasing our understanding of fundamental combustion processes (e.g., 
droplet combustion, soot production, flame spread, smoldering and gas jet flames). 
This research program has been highly successful and was aided by synergistic 
programs in Europe and in Japan. Overall improvements were made in the ability 
to model droplet combustion in spray combustors (e.g., jet engines), predict flame 
spread, predict soot production, and detection and prevention of spacecraft fires. 
Some of the findings from past microgravity combustion research are presented 
below. Current ongoing flight projects on the International Space Station (ISS) are 
given in each area. 
Droplet Combustion
The availability of a long-duration, high-quality microgravity environment allows 
researchers to study the textbook problem of a spherical droplet surrounded by a 
spherical flame in an infinite, quiescent, ambient atmosphere. A cadre of researchers 
from academia, industry and federal laboratories has successfully established this 
simple geometry as an excellent test bed to study fundamental combustion science 
problems and other topics of applied combustion research. Through a robust 
program, researchers gained insight into wide-ranging problems of interest in 
combustion science. These programs included ground-based experimental work in 
drop towers and aircraft flying parabolic trajectories (and normal gravity; i.e., 1-g, 
test laboratories), numerical and theoretical modeling, and ultimately experiments 
in space-based facilities. The programs provided the opportunity to investigate 
phenomena such as:
• Departures from quasi-steady combustion.
• Transition from diffusive to radiative extinction.
• Liquid-phase transport.
• The influence of convection on flame dynamics (refer to Figure 2).
• The dynamics of soot formation and destruction (refer to Figure 3).
• The behavior of multi-component fuels.
• Droplet-droplet interactions and flammability limits.
Results from Past and 
Recent Research 

=== PAGE 12 ===
12
The droplet combustion community is fortunate to currently have the Combustion 
Integrated Rack (CIR) and a CIR insert called Multi-user Droplet Combustion 
Apparatus (MDCA) available to study droplet combustion aboard the ISS. This 
facility is currently operational and allows the dispensing, deployment and ignition 
of droplets ranging in size from 1 to 5 mm (either free floating or fiber supported) 
in a 0-3 atm ambient environment of up to 40 percent oxygen by volume (balance 
of a range of inert gases and inert gas mixtures).
Flame Extinguishment Experiment (FLEX)
The objective of the FLEX is to study heptane and methanol droplets in ambient 
mixtures of oxygen and nitrogen diluted with a second inert gas (nitrogen, carbon 
dioxide, helium or xenon). The goal of the research is to examine how the addition 
of an inert gas suppressant influences the flammability limit of the two fuels. The 
application is an improved quantitative understanding of how flammability limits 
change in reduced gravity as it relates to fire safety. The research to date has shown 
that the flammability limit is lower in reduced gravity. The implication is that 
terrestrial standards for inert gas suppressants in low gravity do not offer the same 
margin of safety as in normal gravity.
The FLEX is of interest for terrestrial applications as well. The physical and 
chemical kinetic models of heptane and methanol combustion are the building 
Figure 2. Flame image of n-heptane droplet 
burning in 70 percent carbon dioxide, 21 percent 
oxygen, balance nitrogen and translated to the right 
at 3 cm/s. (Image credit: NASA, FLEX experiment)
Figure 3. Comparison of sooting propensity in different 
diluents with ethanol burning in 30 percent oxygen at pressure of 
2.4 atm. (Image credit: NASA, FLEX-2 experiment)

=== PAGE 13 ===
13
blocks for more complex models of practical liquid fuels such as diesel and jet fuel. 
The long-duration experiments on the ISS provide benchmark data that researchers 
can develop, improve and ultimately validate detailed theoretical and numerical 
models of liquid hydrocarbon fuel combustion. The FLEX experiments performed 
to date demonstrated radiative and diffusive extinction, combustion instabilities, 
lower flammability limits and recently explained cool flame phenomenon after 
visible flame extinction. Comparison with theoretical and numerical models 
validated aspects of the models while identifying areas that require improvement.
FLEX-2, the follow-on experiment, builds upon FLEX. It studies a range of fuels 
including mixtures of pure fuels, real fuel surrogates, soot formation, slow sub-
buoyant, convective flow effects and droplet-droplet interactions. International 
collaborations extend this to study flame propagation in droplet arrays and 
investigate the combustion of liquid, biologically derived fuels.
Gaseous Diffusion Flames
Past research involved four space experiments that focused on soot processes, flame-
vortex interaction and flame stability. The Laminar Soot Processes (LSP) experiment 
of G. Faeth (U. Michigan) et al. was conducted in the Combustion Module (CM) 
facility in 1997 on the STS-83 and STS-94 space shuttle missions and again in 
2003 on the STS-107 mission. The STS-87 mission in 1997 included both the 
Turbulent Gas-jet Diffusion Flame (TGDF) experiment of M. Y. Bahadori (SAIC) 
et al. and the Enclosed Laminar Flames (ELF) investigation of L. D. Chen (U. 
Iowa) et al.; TGDF was automated and conducted in a Get-Away-Special Canister 
(GAS Can) in the payload bay. ELF was crew operated and conducted in the 
Middeck Glovebox. Lastly, the Smoke Point In Coflow Experiment (SPICE) of D. 
L. Urban (NASA Glenn Research Center [GRC]) et al. was conducted in 2009 on 
the ISS in its Microgravity Science Glovebox (MSG). 
All four experiments were studies of laminar, axisymmetric, gas-jet diffusion flames. 
This is true of even the TGDF experiment, where the flame was not turbulent but 
where an iris mechanism around its base induced vortices in the entrained air. While 
TGDF and LSP flames were within sealed chambers, ELF and SPICE flames were 
within fan-driven flow ducts. The affiliated LSP and SPICE experiments studied 
soot processes in ambient and coflow configurations, respectively. The SPICE 
experiment investigated the transition from non-sooting to sooting with a major goal 
to provide simple predictions of soot emissions. The smoke-point is a result of the 
fuel chemistry and flow conditions and is an effective indicator of the propensity of 

=== PAGE 14 ===
14
a fuel to emit light and to produce 
soot (see Figure 4). Soot control 
remains one of the major unsolved 
problems in combustion and 
engine development. 
The current research program 
includes six experiments planned 
for the ISS. The Structure & 
Liftoff In Combustion Experiment 
(SLICE) of M.B. Long (Yale U.) 
et al. uses the SPICE hardware 
to study lifted and lifting flames 
in the space station glovebox. 
With the similarity in both 
research focus and hardware, SLICE is effectively a second generation of the ELF 
investigation. SLICE started and completed its operations in 2012. The other 
five planned experiments are part of the Advanced Combustion via Microgravity 
Experiments (ACME) project and are in joint development for the CIR, where 
they will each be conducted using a single modular set of hardware. The ACME are 
focused on soot processes, flame stability and extinction, materials flammability, 
and electric-field effects. In alphabetical order, the experiments include: Burning 
Rate Emulator (BRE) of J.G. Quintiere (U. Maryland) et al.; Coflow Laminar 
Diffusion Flame (CLD Flame) of M.B. Long (Yale U.) et al.; Electric-Field Effects 
on Laminar Diffusion Flames (E-FIELD Flames) of D. Dunn-Rankin (UC Irvine) 
et al.; Flame Design of R.L. Axelbaum (Washington U.) et al.; and Structure and 
Response of Spherical Diffusion Flames (s-Flame) of C.K. Law (Princeton U.) et 
al. The ACME are expected to begin operating in 2016. As with their predecessors, 
the ACME experiments are all laminar diffusion flames. Two experiments take 
advantage of the microgravity environment by using a one-dimensional, spherical 
flame enveloping a porous spherical burner. Another experiment uses a porous plate 
burner, whereas the remaining two use a gas-jet flame configuration, both with and 
without a coaxial air flow.
Structure & Liftoff in Combustion Experiment (SLICE)
The SLICE investigates the structure of lifting and lifted flames where flow 
conditions and the combustion chemistry cause the flame to detach from the 
Figure 4. Flames from the 2009 Smoke Point In Coflow experiment 
showing the transition, with increasing fuel flow, from non-smoking 
(left) to a fully open and smoking flame tip (right).

=== PAGE 15 ===
15
burner and stabilize at a downstream position. The twin purposes for the SLICE 
research are increased fuel efficiency and reduced pollutant emission in practical 
combustion devices. More explicitly, the experiment is being conducted to advance 
combustion modeling capability, which “allows system designers to improve 
efficiency and reduce harmful pollutants in ways never before possible” (as stated 
by an external reviewer of the SLICE). SLICE will be carried out using the SPICE 
hardware in the MSG and is a precursor to the CLD Flame experiment that is now 
in development for the ISS CIR as part of the ACME project (Figure 5).
Burning Rate Emulator (BRE)
Unlike the other current ACME, the BRE is focused on fire prevention, especially 
in spacecraft. Specifically, BRE’s objective is to improve our fundamental 
understanding of materials flammability, such as ignition and extinction behavior, 
and assess the relevance of existing flammability test methods for low- and partial-
gravity environments. The burning of solid and liquid fuels will be simulated 
by using a flat porous burner fed with gaseous fuel. The fuel flow rate will be 
controlled based on the measured heat flux (at the burner) and surface temperature, 
mimicking the dependence of condensed-phase fuel vaporization on thermal 
feedback. A small number of gaseous fuels will be used to simulate the burning of 
fuels such as paper, plastic and alcohol by matching properties such as the surface 
temperature and smoke production. The significance of this work is that it has the 
potential to efficiently and completely measure burning rate over a wide range of 
fuel properties. Since this study controls the inherent fuel properties that affect 
various fire scenarios, it will ascertain the relevance of existing flammability test 
methods for low- and partial-gravity environments.
Figure 5. Effect of increasing coflow velocity (from left to right, where the image scale is not consistent) on lifted flame 
behavior from exploratory tests for the Structure & Liftoff In Combustion experiment, which were conducted in 2009 on 
the ISS as part of the Smoke Point In Coflow experiment.

=== PAGE 16 ===
16
Coflow Laminar Diffusion Flame (CLD Flame)
Research, especially including that already conducted in microgravity, has revealed 
that our current predictive ability is significantly lacking for flames at the extremes 
of fuel dilution, namely for sooty, pure-fuel flames and dilute flames that are 
near extinction. The general goal of the CLD Flame experiment is to extend the 
range of flame conditions that can be accurately predicted by developing and 
experimentally verifying chemical kinetic and soot formation submodels. The 
dependence of normal coflow flames on injection velocity and fuel dilution will be 
carefully examined for flames at both very dilute and highly sooting conditions. 
Measurements will be made of the structure of diluted methane and ethylene flames 
in an air coflow. Lifted flames will be used as the basis for the research to avoid 
flame dependence on heat loss to the burner. The results of this experiment will be 
directly applicable to practical combustion issues such as turbulent combustion, 
ignition, flame stability and more.
Electric-Field Effects on Laminar Diffusion Flames (E-FIELD Flames)
Electric fields can strongly influence flames because of their effect on the ions 
present as a result of the combustion reactions. The direct ion transport and the 
induced ion wind can modify the flame shape, alter the soot or flammability limits, 
direct heat transfer, and reduce pollutant emission. The purpose of the E-FIELD 
Flames experiment is to gain an improved understanding of flame-ion production 
and investigate how the ions can be used to control non-premixed flames. Outside 
reviewers recently concluded that the experiment “… will contribute to our critical 
understanding to our knowledge of combustion processes in the presence of electric 
fields.” The experiment will be conducted with a normal coflow flame (as in the 
CLD Flame experiment) or perhaps with a simple gas-jet flame where there is no 
surrounding coflow. An electric field will be generated by creating a high-voltage 
(up to 10 kV) differential between the burner and a flat, circular mesh suspended 
above (i.e., downstream of) the burner. Measurements, as a function of field 
strength and fuel dilution, will be made of the ion current through the flame and 
the flame’s response time to electric forcing.
Flame Design
The primary goal of the Flame Design experiment is to improve our understanding 
of soot inception and control in order to enable the optimization of oxygen-
enriched combustion and the “design” of non-premixed flames that are both robust 

=== PAGE 17 ===
17
and soot free. An outside review panel recently 
declared that Flame Design “… could lead to greatly 
improved burner designs that are efficient and less 
polluting than current designs.” Flame Design will 
investigate the soot inception and extinction limits 
of spherical microgravity flames, created in the 
same manner as for the s-Flame experiment. Tests 
will be conducted with various concentrations of 
both the injected fuel (i.e., ethylene or methane) 
and the oxygen-enriched atmosphere in order to 
determine the role of the flame structure on soot 
inception (Figure 6). The effect of the flow direction 
on soot formation will be assessed with an inverse, 
spherical flame unless such testing is not approved 
by the Payload Safety Review Panel. If inverse 
spherical flame testing is not allowed, the plan is to 
use a coflow burner, conducting both normal and 
inverse flame tests. In the case of the inverse flames, 
the oxygen/inert mixture is injected from a central 
tube while the fuel is ejected from a surrounding 
annulus. The Flame Design experiment will explore 
whether the stoichiometric mixture fraction can 
characterize soot and flammability limits for non-
premixed flames like the equivalence ratio serves as 
an indicator of those limits for premixed flames.
Structure and Response of Spherical Diffusion 
Flames (s-Flame)
The purpose of the s-Flame experiment is to 
advance our ability to predict the structure and 
dynamics, including extinction, of both soot-
free and sooty flames. The spherical flame, which 
is only possible in microgravity, will be created 
through use of a porous spherical burner from which a fuel/inert gas mixture 
will issue into the CIR chamber (Figure 7). Flames will be ignited at non-steady 
conditions and allowed to transition naturally toward extinction. Tests will be 
conducted with various inert diluents in both the fuel and chamber atmosphere. 
Figure 6. Image of a spherical diffusion 
flame on a porous burner (which is also 
visible) at the end of a test conducted 
in NASA’s 2.2-second Drop Tower. 
The gas from the burner was 1.51 mg/s 
of 100 percent ethylene issuing into air 
at atmospheric pressure. (Image credit: 
NASA, ACME project, Flame Design 
experiment)
Figure 7. Image of a partially premixed 
spherical flame on a porous burner (which 
is also visible). The microgravity test was 
conducted in a NASA’s 2.2-second Drop 
Tower. The gas issuing from the burner 
was 25 percent propane, 2 percent oxygen, 
49 percent argon, and 24 percent nitrogen. 
(Image credit: NASA, ACME project, 
s-Flame experiment)

=== PAGE 18 ===
18
The fuel gases include hydrogen and methane 
for soot-free flames, and ethylene for sooty 
flames. One experiment objective is to identify 
the extinction limits for both radiative and 
convective extinction (i.e., at high and low 
system Damkohler numbers, respectively). 
Another objective is to determine the existence, 
onset and nature of pulsating instabilities that 
have been theoretically predicted to occur in 
such flames with fuel/diluent mixtures that are 
above a critical Lewis number.
Solid-Fuel Combustion/Material 
Flammability
Space-based and ground-based, low-gravity 
experiments in material flammability have 
revealed substantial differences in the behavior 
of flames over solid materials in reduced 
gravity. Many of these observations have 
specific impact on the hazard of spacecraft 
fires in addition to being of fundamental solid 
fuel combustion importance. Microgravity 
experiments demonstrated that the assumed 
margin of safety of reduced flammability in microgravity, based on quiescent test 
results, may not be valid for most spacecraft environments where ventilation flow 
strongly enhances flames. In the low-flow conditions of microgravity or partial 
gravity, some materials are flammable at lower oxygen concentrations than in 
normal gravity (Figure 8). Materials are easier to ignite in low gravity because of 
reduced natural convective cooling from the fuel surface. Once established, flames 
in low-speed airflows may preferentially spread into the oncoming airflow (Figure 
9) depending on the flow speed. This is opposite to the effect that occurs in normal 
gravity. Radiant heat transfer was shown to substantially affect the material’s 
flammability. Surface radiative heat loss reduces the flammability, but an external 
radiative heat flux can cause materials to ignite and spread faster. 
Currently, solid fuel combustion flight research is limited to the Burning and 
Suppression of Solids (BASS) experiment aboard the ISS. BASS is a rapid turn-
Figure 8. Flammability map shows region of 
enhanced flammability in the low-convective flow 
range.
Figure 9. Flame spreading preferentially upstream 
in slow convective flow. (Image credit: NASA, 
Radiative Ignition and Transition to Spread 
Investigation experiment)

=== PAGE 19 ===
19
around flight experiment that started its operations in March 2012. It is a precursor 
for the Solid Fuel Ignition and Extinction (SoFIE) flight experiments that are 
currently planned for launch in 2019. The BASS approach is to use an existing 
flow duct, SPICE, to carry out microgravity tests in the ISS Microgravity Science 
Glovebox. Several types of solid materials were burned including flat samples, 
polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) spheres, porous wax slabs and wax candles. 
The glovebox is normally limited to ISS “air,” nominally 21 percent oxygen by 
volume and one atmospheric pressure. However, more recently nitrogen has been 
used to perform tests as low as 17 percent oxygen. The tests have yielded useful results 
on the flow-velocity effect and flame suppression (by nitrogen), and the quick return 
of the test results has helped to guide the next, more complete flight experiments.
The SoFIE flight hardware (Figure 10) is currently under development and 
includes an insert for the CIR rack. In addition, some of the investigations will 
make use of a larger and improved flow duct along the lines of the BASS concept. 
The considerations for the solid fuels include material, preparation and purity, 
geometry, external heating, pre-ignition conditions, and ignition. The most likely 
candidates include plastics like PMMA or Delrin. There is a tremendous advantage 
to be gained if the sample can be burned, extinguished and then re-ignited multiple 
times. This minimizes the time-consuming process of opening the chamber and 
replacing the fuel specimens. The chamber environment will consist of oxygen 
from 10 percent to 40 percent by volume at a pressure between 0.2 and 1.5 atm. 
Figure 10. Solid Fuel Ignition and Extinction insert concept under development. A recirculating flow provides a region of well 
characterized jet flow within which solid samples will be burned.

=== PAGE 20 ===
20
Figure 12. Digital still camera images showing a flame burning a 2-cm wide cotton-fiberglass fabric in opposed flow. 
Images are taken every 1.25 seconds (starting at top and moving from left to right). The flow is decreased in discrete 
steps from 10 cm/s all the way down to less than 1 cm/s. The flame response to flow changes is very rapid, and the 
flow effects on the flame and its spread rate are dramatic. Total burn time is 90 seconds. Flow changes are indicated 
by numbers.
Figure 11. Flame sequence of a burning 2-cm diameter acrylic sphere at 17 percent oxygen and 12 cm/s flow from the 
Burning and Suppression of Solids experiment. The images are about 1.5 sec. apart. With the reduction in oxygen from 
21 percent (air) to 17 percent, the flame stays bluer much longer (soot formation is delayed) facilitating comparison with 
model. The high-resolution images allow model comparison of flame growth rate, flame-to-fuel distance, and the solid 
regression rate.

=== PAGE 21 ===
21
Space Exploration Atmospheres (SEA) relevant to NASA can be investigated. 
Airflows in the spacecraft ventilation range of 0 to 30 cm/s will be supplied to the 
flame. The flow field must be well-characterized so the models will have accurate 
boundary conditions.
Burning and Suppression of Solids (BASS)
The BASS investigation is currently being conducted in the MSG to examine 
the burning and extinction characteristics of a wide variety of fuel samples in 
microgravity (Figures 11-13). The BASS experiment will improve 1-g material fire 
safety rating tests and help to guide strategies for extinguishing accidental fires in 
microgravity. BASS results contribute to the limited database of solid combustion 
in microgravity. In addition, BASS will guide combustion computational models 
used in the design of fire detection and suppression systems in microgravity 
and on Earth. Detailed combustion models are validated using the simpler flow 
environment afforded by tests in microgravity. Once validated, they can be used to 
build more complex combustion models needed to capture the important details 
of flames burning in normal gravity. These models have wide applicability to the 
general understanding of many terrestrial combustion problems.
BASS tests the hypothesis that materials in microgravity, with adequate ventilation, 
burn as well if not better than the same material in normal gravity with other 
conditions being identical (pressure, oxygen concentration, temperature, etc.). 
Figure 13. Drop tower test burning PMMA sphere showing transition to 0-g and flame response to the application of a jet of 
nitrogen for extinguishment.

=== PAGE 22 ===
22
The fuel is ignited and the airflow speed is the main variable. After some time, 
a nitrogen gas suppressant was applied to selected flames. There are important 
differences in the suppression of fires in space compared to on Earth. On Earth 
it is understood that the best results are generally obtained when the extinguisher 
“attacks” the base of the flame, which is both the stabilization point and the point 
where fresh air first enters the flame. For a fire burning in microgravity, the best 
point of application of suppressant may not be immediately apparent, especially for 
a partially obstructed flame or a wake-stabilized flame. Depending on the geometry 
of the flame and the characteristics of the extinguisher (distance from flame, 
dispersion angle), it is possible that the suppressant stream will be ineffective or 
might actually make the flame worse through the entrainment of oxygen. 
Early results have demonstrated that nitrogen applied to the flame can actually 
strengthen it because of this effect. Using nitrogen as a flame suppressant in 
microgravity provides a direct link to current and planned extinguishment 
techniques.
The SoFIE project is in the Science Definition phase with the plan of developing 
a CIR insert and large flow duct within the MSG to serve up to five separate 
investigations. These investigations all support the overall objective of the SoFIE  
project, which is to study and characterize ignition and flammability of solid 
spacecraft materials in practical geometries and realistic atmospheric conditions. 
There are currently five investigations described on the following pages.
Correlation of Flammability between Normal and Microgravity
The goal is to obtain the microgravity flammability map for select materials to 
provide information on the sensitivity of the material’s flammability to ventilation 
flow, ambient oxygen concentration and possibly pressure, to find the fundamental 
limiting oxygen concentration in microgravity. This will be defined as the worst 
case in microgravity for comparison with the NASA-STD-6001 Test 1 worst case 
upward flame spread in normal gravity. The comparison will enable evaluation of 
the oxygen margins of safety associated with normal gravity testing.
The microgravity burning behavior of some actual engineering materials planned 
for spacecraft can be obtained as a function of oxygen, pressure and flow speed for 
comparison to normal gravity results.
The significance of this portion of the work is that it will provide a better 
understanding of how the NASA Test 1 flammability limits relate to the actual 

=== PAGE 23 ===
23
material flammability limits in microgravity. It will also provide an increased margin 
of safety for materials flammability based upon a slightly modified NASA Test 1 
protocol, since recent drop-tower results suggest that the current Test 1 might not 
be conservative.
Fundamentals of Flame Growth and Extinction in Microgravity
The goal is to understand the fundamental processes of flame growth, spread and 
decay over solid materials, and their dependence on gravity, flow velocity, oxygen 
percentage, pressure, sample size and preheating. Solid spheres of plastic fuel will be 
burned in long-duration tests so that the entire flame history can be obtained.
Using the experimental results, a robust numerical model will be developed to a) 
simulate the transient flame development in the reduced-gravity experiment; b) 
relate material flammability performance between normal and reduced gravity; 
and c) examine the relevance of NASA-STD-6001 (Flammability, Offgassing, and 
Compatibility Requirements and Test Procedures) Test 1.
The practical limitations of ground-based microgravity facilities are well 
understood. While future ISS solid combustion experiments can be conducted 
for long durations, even these will have some limitations. The significance of this 
portion of the work is that by careful selection of ISS experiments together with the 
model, many of these limitations can be overcome to a degree sufficient to lead to 
a significant improvement in our understanding of how material flammability tests 
conducted on Earth apply to space environments.
Thermal and Species Field Effects on Material Flammability
Theory and modeling results suggest that an important difference between normal 
gravity and microgravity material flammability is caused by the influence of the 
flow field on the relative overlap of the thermal and species fields in the flame zone. 
The goal is to determine flame spread rate over thin fuels in quiescent microgravity 
and compare that with a closed-form expression including the pertinent solid 
properties and environmental parameters. Gas phase temperature and concentration 
fields of carbon dioxide and oxygen will be measured at certain key locations 
with the objective of delineating the propagation of the thermal field from the 
propagation of the species field; the separation between the two is postulated to be 
the mechanism for radiative flame extinguishment. The separation between the two 
fields will be controlled by changing the fuel thickness and ambient pressure.

=== PAGE 24 ===
24
The significance of this portion of the work is that it will establish quantitative 
criteria, based on fundamentals, which determine the flammability of materials 
in microgravity where radiative heat transfer dominates because of high-residence 
time created by a lack of buoyancy-induced or forced flow. This can lead to the 
specification of a critical fuel thickness, a critical forced velocity, or a critical oxygen 
level that makes a material inherently fire safe.
External Heat Flux Effects on the Ignitability and Suppression of 
Materials in Microgravity
The goal is to conduct microgravity ignition and suppression experiments for materials 
burning in low-speed, forced flow with externally applied heat flux in SEA. Time to 
ignition and the time between introduction of suppression agent and extinction are 
measured as a function of environmental conditions. The experiment will be supported 
by a comprehensive model of piloted ignition and extinction of materials in SEA.
Reduced-gravity aircraft tests have been conducted. However, because of the limited, 
reduced gravity time, ignition times could be obtained only at high, radiant heat 
fluxes. At airflow velocities below those induced by buoyancy, ignition times reach 
values that are significantly lower than those observed in normal-gravity buoyant 
flows. The reduction of the ignition times indicates that, under these low-flow 
conditions, the ignition process is affected more by the reduction in surface heat loss 
than by the corresponding oxygen transport reduction. By developing a theoretical 
model for the ignition time, it was also shown that the critical heat flux for ignition 
in microgravity can be as short as half the value measured in normal gravity.
Microgravity experiments will be used to validate the model, which in turn will 
be used to predict the fire behavior of different combustible materials in SEA. 
Currently, there exists no testing methodology specifically designed to determine 
the fire hazard of materials under those conditions. The significance of this portion 
of the work is that it will fill that void with a new test methodology and provide 
additional information about the effect of SEA on the flammability and suppression 
of materials. It may also help to interpret and extend current NASA testing 
procedures to SEA.
Narrow Channel as a 1-g Flammability Test Method
The goal is to measure flame spread rate across a representative, thick, solid fuel 
as a function of forced opposed flow velocity, oxygen concentration, and pressure, 

=== PAGE 25 ===
25
corresponding in particular to NASA‘s SEA in microgravity. Opposed flow 
extinction limits for the thick, solid fuel will be found by lowering the velocity 
until the flame extinguishes at a given oxygen concentration and pressure.
The data will be used to determine if an optimum gap height in the corresponding 
Narrow Channel device can be found to reproduce these results in normal gravity, 
or how the gap height needs to be changed for different conditions. The Narrow 
Channel is a 1-g material flammability test, which minimizes buoyant flow by 
constraining flame height. By restricting the buoyant plume, the flame size is 
controlled and in many ways mimics microgravity flames.
The significance of this portion of the work is that experiments can be structured 
using the Narrow Channel in normal gravity to predict aspects of microgravity 
flammability for a wide range of candidate materials. The flight experiment will 
provide a direct comparison of the Narrow Channel tests and the numerical 
model results.
Premixed Flames
Prior work in premixed flames, 
flown on two separate space 
shuttle missions, was limited to 
very fuel-lean conditions in which 
the mass diffusivity dominated 
the thermal diffusivity (i.e., very 
low Lewis number). Under these 
conditions, steady flame balls were 
shown to be possible (Figure 14). 
This remarkable result validated 
prior theoretical predictions, 
improved our understanding of combustion reactions near extinction limits, and 
provided pure test beds for numerical modeling. The Structure of Flame Balls at 
Low Lewis-number (SOFBALL) experiment of P. Ronney (USC) was conducted 
in the CM facility in 1997 on the STS-83 and STS-94 space shuttle missions and 
again in 2003 on the STS-107 mission.
Another noteworthy microgravity work related to premixed flames was the invention 
of a burner with ultra-low pollutant emissions (Figure 15). This has applications in 
domestic water heaters and furnaces.
Figure 14. Flame balls, a classical combustion phenomenon that is 
unique to microgravity. (Image credit: NASA, SOFBALL experiment)

=== PAGE 26 ===
26
Fire Safety
Past research involved a space experiment 
that focused on measuring the 
extinguishing capability of water mist on 
a premixed flame propagating along a 
tube to gain a better understanding of the 
water mist fire suppression phenomenon 
and help design more effective mist fire-
suppression systems to replace banned 
Halon systems. The Water Mist Fire 
Suppression experiment (Mist) of T. 
McKinnon (Colorado School of Mines) 
et al. was conducted in the CM facility 
in the space shuttle mission STS-107 in 
2003. The purpose of the Mist experiment 
was to study how water droplet diameter 
and water concentration affect the speed, 
strength and shape of flames created 
in various fuel and oxygen mixtures. 
After years of research, testing, flight 
experiments, and advocating the benefits 
of water-mist technology, non-toxic 
water-mist portable fire extinguishers 
were designed, tested, fabricated and 
certified for spaceflight. The first two of the planned nine water-mist portable fire 
extinguishers were sent to the ISS in December 2015 to replace CO2 units that are 
currently onboard. The rest of the units will be sent in three more missions.
Spacecraft fire detection provides significant challenges compared to terrestrial 
conditions because the properties of the smoke emitted from fires is affected 
by buoyancy. The conditions on a spacecraft require rapid detection of fires 
with limited false alarms. Two recent experiments examined the issues related 
to spacecraft fire detection. The Dust Aerosol measurement Feasibility Test 
examined the background aerosol particulate levels on the ISS. The Smoke Aerosol 
Measurement Experiment (SAME) examined the particle-size distribution of the 
smoke from spacecraft materials. These instruments can provide useful guidance for 
the designers of future spacecraft smoke detectors.
Figure 15. Low-polluting burner remains cool to touch. 
(Image credit: NASA-Lawrence Berkeley Lab, Ultraclean 
Low Swirl Combustion project)

=== PAGE 27 ===
27
Super-Critical Processes
Because of its unique and significant advantages, Super-Critical Water Oxidation 
(SCWO) was identified by NASA as a potential technology for use in closed-loop, 
life-support systems addressing waste management and resource reclamation needs. 
Initial efforts in applying SCWO to solid waste management were conducted at 
NASA’s Ames Research Center in the 1990s in ground-based laboratories. These 
early tests were designed to look at oxidation rates and destruction efficiencies for 
cellulosic material as a function of particle size, mixing, temperature and pressure. 
Results from these tests provided empirical correlations for use in reactor design.
In 2004, an investigation to assess the impact of buoyancy on SCWO processes 
was initiated as part of GRC’s microgravity combustion program. The SCWO 
Test Facility, shown in Figure 16, with a 500-ml reactor along with all necessary 
supporting hardware and diagnostics was designed and built for use in the Zero 
Gravity Facility (ZGF, the 5.2-second drop tower). A limited number of ZGF 
tests were conducted for the oxidation of methanol in water (methanol 10 weight 
percent) using air, injected into the super-critical mixture, as the oxidizer.
Figure 16. (a) Super-Critical Water Oxidation (SCWO) Test Facility designed for use in the Zero Gravity Facility shown loaded 
in the drop bus just prior to dropping; (b) 500 ml SCWO reactor vessel installed in the SCWO Test Facility; (c) schematic 
showing axial location of thermocouples inside the SCWO reactor. (Image credit: NASA, SCWO experiment)

=== PAGE 28 ===
28
The first experimental objective was to determine the extent to which buoyancy 
affects the developing temperature profile. Buoyancy effects were expected because 
the reaction is exothermic; however, because of the limited microgravity time in the 
drop tower, it was not entirely clear these would be observable. Comparison of the 
temperature traces, as shown in Figure 17 for both normal gravity and microgravity, 
confirmed this expectation. In normal gravity, temperatures were found to be 
more uniform in the bulk fluid, which is due to buoyant mixing; whereas, non-
uniformities resulting in thermal stratifications (evidenced by a “hot zone” between 
two cooler regions) were observed under microgravity conditions. A second 
experimental objective, to measure the reaction rate and product concentrations 
with Raman spectroscopy, was not met because of budgetary constraints.
This earlier work, which was initiated in 2008, at GRC was instrumental in 
development of a collaborative effort between NASA and the French space agency, 
CNES. The objective of this ISS flight investigation, referred to as the Super-
Critical Water Mixture experiment (SCWM), is to investigate the behavior of 
salt precipitate formation and transport in super-critical water in the presence of 
temperature gradients. This will provide practical insights into the mechanisms of 
salt agglomeration, transport and deposition that often plague SCWO reactors.
Figure 17. Comparison between 1-g and 0-g axial temperature immediately following axial injection of oxidizer; (a) in 
1-g temperature profiles show high degree of buoyant-driven thermal mixing for locations above injector and (b) in 0-g 
temperature profiles show significant thermal stratification with a hot zone (TC-B) established between two cooler regions 
suggesting poor thermal mixing in 0-g. (Image credit: NASA, SCWO experiment)

=== PAGE 29 ===
29
The investigation will utilize a refurbished High Temperature Insert (HTI-R), built 
by CNES, with a fluid cell (approximately 0.3 cm3) filled with a water-salt mixture 
using Na2SO4 (0.5 percent w/v) at its critical density. During an experiment, the 
salt-water mixture will be slowly raised to a temperature and pressure above its 
critical point enabling observation of homogenous salt precipitation, measurement 
of the critical end-point (i.e., the shift in critical temperature that is due to the 
presence of the salt), and the transport mechanisms both with and without the 
presence of a temperature gradient. A baseline test was conducted using pure water 
in the HTI during a test sequence on the ISS performed in July 2010. Images from 
this test showing the location of the liquid phase and meniscus geometry at sub-
critical and super-critical conditions is shown in Figure 18. This test sequence was 
designed to investigate the formation and stability of a temperature gradient in the 
fluid in its super-critical state. The follow-on SCWM experiment will employ a 
similar test sequence and results from the pure-water test sequence will establish a 
useful baseline for comparison.
Figure 18. Sub-critical and super-critical states of water mixtures imaged aboard the International Space Station showing 
(a) the geometry of the fluid meniscus at sub-critical conditions and the monophasic super-critical fluid with no meniscus at 
super-critical conditions. (Image credit: NASA-CNES, SCWM experiment)

=== PAGE 30 ===
30
Well over 200 principal investigators have utilized reduced-gravity facilities to 
study fundamental combustion phenomena in the areas described above. Most of 
the research was conducted in drop towers and aircraft, and the most promising 
experiments, after a thorough scientific and engineering review process, were 
selected for conduct in space-based facilities. The investigations led to numerous 
discoveries, highlighted the importance of frequently neglected phenomena, 
improved our understanding and predictive capabilities for all combustion systems, 
and enhanced our ability to detect and prevent spacecraft fires. Some of the most 
pertinent highlights and lessons learned are presented below.
Flame Existence
One of the most seemingly simple, but long-standing, questions addressed by 
microgravity testing involved whether flames could even exist without buoyancy. 
Many researchers, including notable experts, argued openly in the scientific 
literature that, in the absence of convection, a steady flame could not exist; 
diffusive transport alone could not sustain a flame. Two spaceflight experiments 
demonstrated conclusively the fallacy of such arguments.
The first involved the behavior of a simple candle flame in a long-duration 
microgravity environment (Dietrich et al., 2000). The candle flames in Figure 1 show 
images of a familiar shape seen in normal gravity and a flame during a microgravity 
test aboard the Russian Mir orbiting station. Contrary to published speculation, the 
microgravity flame burned in some tests for over 45 minutes before extinguishing 
from a lack of fuel. Despite having a much lower burning rate (the microgravity flame 
in Figure 1 was nearly invisible to the naked eye and a very long shutter time was 
needed to record the image shown), the microgravity flame burned to a lower ambient 
oxygen mole fraction than the identical candle flame would have on Earth.
The second example involves the existence of stationary, spherical premixed flames 
or flame balls. These flames were predicted theoretically to exist if (among other 
conditions) the thermal diffusivity of the bulk mixture was much lower than the 
mass diffusion of the limiting reactant: that is, a low Lewis number. Their existence, 
however, was thought to be a strictly mathematical exercise. The SOFBALL studied 
premixed fuel/oxidizer/diluent mixtures in a large combustion chamber and showed 
conclusively that the flames could exist (Figure 14), producing the weakest flames 
ever burned (approximately 1 Watt) and some burning for over 40 minutes before 
the experiment timed out (e.g. Ronney, et al., 1998).
Highlights and Lessons 
Learned

=== PAGE 31 ===
31
Low-Stretch (Low-Velocity) Flames
Reduced-gravity facilities offer the opportunity to study flames where the 
characteristic velocities are much lower than typical buoyancy-induced gas 
velocities, approximately 1 m/s in the candle flame in Figure 1. These low-speed 
flows result in flame stretch or strain rates that are unachievable in terrestrial, 
bench-scale experiments. Conventional theories of flame limits all predicted that, 
as the flame stretch characteristic velocity decreased, the oxygen concentration 
that would support steady or quasi-steady-state combustion would monotonically 
decrease.
This was not the case, however, as several classes of experiments demonstrated. At 
low-characteristic velocities (low-flame stretch), radiative loss begins to dominate, 
eventually leading to flame extinction at sufficiently low velocities or stretch rates 
(e.g., Olson et al., 1988). Figure 8 shows this schematically. For flame spread across 
solid materials, the ordinate in Figure 8 is the ambient oxygen mole fraction and the 
abscissa the gas velocity across the solid surface. The boundary represents limit of 
steady flame spread. Outside of this boundary, steady flame spread does not occur; 
inside, it does. The curve identifies a much lower flammability limit than originally 
predicted. For flame spread across solid materials, the characteristic gas velocity 
of the minimum in the curve is on the order of 10 cm/s and also corresponds 
to a maximum in the flame spread rate. To give perspective, this is the velocity 
typical of that of spacecraft ventilation systems. This observed minimum has large 
implications for material flammability in reduced gravity and, thus, implications for 
spacecraft fire safety. 
Another related phenomenon with spacecraft fire safety implications is the 
observation of flame spread direction at low-flow velocities in the microgravity 
environment of spaceflight when a thin fuel is ignited at the middle of the sample. 
Completely contrary to normal-gravity behavior, the flame spreads upstream, into 
the oncoming airflow, in space when the forced-flow velocities are low (Figure 9); 
whereas, the flame always spreads downstream, in the buoyant flow direction, in 
normal gravity, even in the absence of forced flow.  
Recent results from the BASS experiment currently running on the ISS indicate 
that NASA-STD-6001 Test 1 is not conservative, and materials can burn at lower 
oxygen levels in microgravity than on Earth. Also, current findings show that local 
application of suppressant is not adequate for flame extinguishment. The local jet 
entrains air and sustains the flame even when the ambient airflow is turned off. 

=== PAGE 32 ===
32
The unique microgravity environment also allows researchers to study the classical 
problem of a spherical flame surrounding a spherical droplet in a quiescent ambient 
(e.g., Dietrich et al., 1996; Nayagam et al., 1998). Virtually every combustion 
textbook contains an analysis of this problem. For droplet combustion, the ordinate 
in Figure 8 is the ambient oxygen mole fraction and the abscissa is the droplet 
diameter, with the boundary defining again the flammability boundary. Note also 
that for droplet combustion, the curve in Figure 8 is actually reversed, with larger 
droplets having lower stretch rates or larger Damkohler numbers. Both space-
based and, to a limited extent, drop-tower testing demonstrated the existence 
of this limit. Identification of this curve is important not only for identifying 
flammability limits for spacecraft fire safety applications but for practical reasons 
as well. Droplet combustion experiments involve liquid fuels, and the curve in 
Figure 8 is determined by the detailed interaction of the heat and mass transport 
and chemical kinetics. The chemical kinetic mechanisms responsible for the curve 
are the building blocks of mechanisms for practical fuels. These droplet combustion 
experiments, therefore, provide benchmark data for the validation of physical and 
chemical kinetic sub-models of practical fuels.
Jet Flames
Another common class of flames in combustion research is gaseous jet flames (a 
fuel gas issuing from a nozzle into an initially quiescent oxidizing atmosphere). In 
terrestrial laboratories, gas-jet diffusion flames are used to elucidate the chemical 
kinetic mechanisms of simple fuels, to understand flame stability, and to study 
the details of soot production and destruction. For bench-scale laminar gas-jet 
experiments in normal gravity, it is difficult to suppress the effects of buoyancy, 
making the problem significantly less tractable. Microgravity studies in drop towers 
and space-based facilities show striking differences (in comparison to normal-
gravity studies) in the observed flame heights of jet flames at low and moderate 
jet Reynolds numbers (e.g., Hegde et al., 1994; Urban et al., 1998). The onset of 
smoke production found in low gravity is substantially different than in normal 
gravity and contrary to predictions in prior literature. The experiments also show 
significant differences in the size of the primary soot particles and in the larger 
fractal dimension of the soot agglomerates (e.g., Greenberg et. al., 1997). The data 
from these experiments serve as benchmark data for the development and validation 
of detailed chemical kinetic and soot formation and destruction models.

=== PAGE 33 ===
33
Flame Stability
In normal gravity, flames that approach their flammability limit are frequently 
“blown off” by the large buoyancy-induced flow. These same near-limit flames in 
microgravity exhibit very different and unique behaviors in many cases. The simple 
microgravity candle flame in Figure 1, as it depleted the ambient oxygen and 
neared extinction, exhibited flame oscillations in most tests (Dietrich et al., 2000). 
These oscillations increased in magnitude until the flame finally extinguished, but 
they could exist for prolonged periods of time (over one minute in extreme cases). 
Similar flame oscillations occur during spherically symmetric droplet combustion 
(Dietrich et al., 1996).
Instabilities also occur during flame spread over solid and liquid surfaces. Over 
solids, a complex fingerlike smoldering front occurs during near-limit flame spread 
under certain conditions (Olson et al., 1998). A pulsating gas-phase flame spread 
occurs as a flame spreads across a liquid pool under selected ambient conditions (e.g., 
Miller et al., 2000). Finally, microgravity experiments involving premixed flames 
demonstrate instabilities in both low- and high-Lewis-number gas mixtures (e.g., 
Pearlman and Ronney, 1994). 
These instabilities, obscured in normal gravity by the strong buoyant flow, highlight 
the ability of microgravity experiments to provide insights into fundamental flame 
behavior. Highly exothermic reactions coupled with nonlinear heat loss through 
radiative and diffusive transport of both heat and mass provide combustion 
theoreticians and modelers a rich canvas on which to develop, test and validate 
simplified and detailed flame models.
Cool Flames
Recent spaceflight experiments (FLEX) involving single alkane droplets burning in 
a quiescent ambient uncovered unexplained and unexpected behavior. For the large 
alkane droplets, after ignition the droplet burns for a short time with a typical hot 
flame. As expected, the hot flame extinguished when the radiative loss reduced the 
flame temperature below a critical value. Inexplicably after hot flame extinction, 
however, the droplet continued to vaporize at the same rate for an extended period 
and then suddenly stopped vaporizing at a finite droplet size. The plateau in 
vaporization occurred coincident with the formation of a large vapor cloud. This 
vaporization, we now know, is supported by a lower-temperature cool flame that 
forms after visible flame extinction. The vaporization stops when the cool flame 

=== PAGE 34 ===
34
extinguishes and the vapor cloud forms because the cool flame only burns a fraction 
of the fuel vaporized from the droplet surface.
This cool flame supported droplet combustion was not only unexpected, but also 
thought to be impossible by many in the peer community (it took a year for the 
team to convince themselves and then another year to convince the skeptical peer 
community). Cool flames form as an intermediate step between unreacted fuel and 
oxidizer, but should not form after a hot flame extinguishes. The FLEX tests showed 
that the cool flame can burn for a prolonged period of time. The microgravity 
droplet combustion tests offer a unique platform to study these low temperature 
chemical reactions. Cool flame chemistry is very important in internal combustion 
engines and a predictive understanding of their chemistry is critical in developing the 
next generation engines with higher efficiency and lower emissions.
Ancillary Hardware Developments
Although experiments in microgravity offer enticing rewards to combustion 
researchers, the harsh realities of experiments in reduced-gravity facilities present 
significant hardware and diagnostic challenges to scientists and engineers. Drop 
tower and space-based experiments have severe space, weight, volume, safety and 
power limitations. These limitations have driven technology developments with 
applications far beyond the microgravity combustion science program.
Some noteworthy accomplishments include the development of a system for 
measuring full-field, quantitative soot volume fraction via laser-light extinction 
(Greenberg et. al., 1997a). This novel system allows the precise measurement 
of soot volume fraction and is the enabling technology for experiments that continue 
to provide benchmark data on soot formation and destruction. Rainbow Schlieren 
Deflectometry system developed at GRC provided the first full-field quantitative 
measurements of gas-phase temperature in microgravity combustion experiments 
(Greenberg, et al., 1995). The most significant developments have 
been technologies to both measure and characterize small aerosol particles (e.g., Qi 
et. al., 2008).
Spacecraft Fire Safety
The 1967 tragic accident of Apollo 1, in which three NASA astronauts lost their 
lives when a cabin fire broke out during a launch pad test, and the near-tragedy 
of Apollo 13 in 1970, when an oxygen tank exploded during transit to the moon, 

=== PAGE 35 ===
35
highlight the hazard posed by accidental fires on spacecraft. A fire or explosion 
requires all elements of the “fire triangle” to be present: fuel, oxygen and a source of 
ignition. Crewed spacecraft, by necessity, contain all three. In addition, spacecraft 
frequently operate at an ambient oxygen mole fraction higher than that of air, have 
limited options for escape, and have almost no tolerance for damage to critical life 
support systems. As a result, NASA maintains a very disciplined safety culture with 
respect to fire through strict material controls, rigid design standards for electronic 
equipment (and all possible ignition sources), and mandatory suppression systems on 
all spacecraft. 
Although NASA has been vigilant in its approach to accidental fires, the approach 
to fire safety aboard spacecraft was dominated by a general lack of knowledge about 
how fire behaves in microgravity. This resulted in several critical misconceptions 
about potential fires in spacecraft:
1. A steady fire cannot exist in a quiescent microgravity environment.
2. A fire will self-extinguish if ventilation is shut off.
3. Because the reduced-gravity environment is inherently safer, terrestrial fire 
standards and tests represent a very conservative approach to fire safety.
Research at NASA GRC in both ground-based laboratories and microgravity 
facilities and space-based microgravity experiments (summarized by Friedman and 
Ross, 2001 and Ruff et al., 2009) demonstrates the fallacy of these assumptions and 
demonstrates GRC’s contribution to spacecraft fire safety science with respect to fire 
prevention through material flammability and screening. 
GRC also maintains active research programs in both fire detection and suppression. 
Fundamental research in microgravity highlighted the vastly different particulate size 
associated with flames in microgravity. Since many fire detectors operate by sensing 
fire-generated particulates, they would need to use different signatures to detect 
fires in microgravity. If terrestrial fire detectors were used in space, they would be 
“looking” for something different than they should. One of the achievements in this 
area is a new device that monitors particulates and chemical species simultaneously 
to better detect the onset of a fire. In joint testing with the Federal Aviation 
Administration, this device outperformed current aircraft smoke detectors in false-
alarm rejection and real-event detection. The new device can be “tuned” to examine 
particulates and species characteristics associated with fires in microgravity.

=== PAGE 36 ===
36
Combustion research remains an active field of research with direct application to 
terrestrial issues, fundamental science, and NASA‘s exploration goals. The New 
Initiative program is based upon continued use of the in-orbit resources (CIR 
inserts) with the addition of another CIR insert to the on-orbit resources. These 
topics were selected based upon the data sources considered by the Decadal survey. 
All of these topics have direct application to either terrestrial or exploration issues 
and are among the most challenging questions faced in the discipline. 
Droplet Combustion
Currently operating inside the CIR is the FLEX, which uses the MDCA to study 
droplet combustion. FLEX and the follow-on FLEX–2 experiments are exploiting 
the microgravity environment to study the spherically symmetric combustion 
of liquid droplets. FLEX is motivated by the need to better identify and predict 
limiting oxygen indices (LOIs) and inert-gas suppressant efficacy. The FLEX–2 
experiments are motivated by the need to better understand droplet combustion as 
it applies to the fundamental problems of energy conversion and utilization where 
liquid hydrocarbon fuels are a predominant source of energy in the world.
To date, these experiments have identified both the radiative and diffusive 
extinction limits for heptane and methanol droplets and identified an LOI that is 
both significantly lower than in normal gravity and lower than previously predicted 
and anticipated. The data from these experiments are helping researchers to develop, 
refine and validate chemical kinetic models important to terrestrial combustion 
systems. The most significant observation from these experiments, however, is the 
identification of stable, quasi-steady cool flames that form after radiative extinction 
of the visible flame for heptane droplet combustion (Nayagam et al., 2012). This 
low-temperature chemistry is important in automobile engines because it is one of 
the major phenomena limiting engine efficiency.
While the droplet combustion research community is fortunate to have access to 
the CIR and MDCA, funding limitations have severely cut down on the number of 
researchers, the number of research projects, and the overall extent of the program. 
The space-based research in the CIR/MDCA should be expanded to a wider range 
of fuels, specifically focusing on practical fuels and practical fuel surrogates. Ideally, 
this would be closely aligned with similar efforts funded by other federal agencies 
(e.g., Department of Energy and Department of Defense). Virtually absent from 
the current program is also critical research on high-pressure droplet combustion 
Opportunities for Combustion 
Research on the ISS

=== PAGE 37 ===
37
and spray combustion. These programs have immense practical applications 
to the nation’s energy future as the vast majority of energy consumption in the 
transportation sector is from liquid fuels. Finally, a critical missing element in the 
current program is the lack of a comprehensive, ground-based research program 
that includes experiments in drop towers and the companion theoretical and 
numerical modeling efforts. These programs serve two purposes. First, they provide 
valuable and relevant insights into the physics of liquid fuel combustion, while 
providing unparalleled educational opportunities to graduate and undergraduate 
students. Second, they form the basis of the next generation of space-based 
microgravity experiments.
Gaseous Diffusion Flames
The gaseous diffusion flame research is generally focused on improved combustion 
technology for Earth applications. Practical combustion often involves turbulent 
flames at elevated pressures with at least partial premixing. These aspects suggest 
promising opportunities for future research. Turbulent combustion is exceedingly 
complex, but microgravity testing provides the opportunity to study momentum-
dominated flames with increased scales and residence times making the research 
more tractable. Although turbulent flames can present significant challenges for 
microgravity research, innovative experiments studying pulsed laminar flames, 
and the interaction of vortices with laminar flames (e.g., TGDF) can advance 
fundamental understanding of turbulent combustion. As previously discussed, 
high-pressure combustion is strongly influenced by buoyancy and challenging to 
investigate in normal gravity. Partially premixed combustion is found in a wide 
variety of applications and has promising potential for high fuel efficiency and low 
pollutant emission, for example in modern gas turbine combustion. 
The ACME hardware that is now in development will accommodate experiments 
with burner-stabilized, partially premixed flames. The ACME investigations, 
planned to follow the FLEX experiments, examine gas-jet diffusion flames. These 
fundamental experiments again exploit the simplified flame geometry afforded 
by microgravity to develop, validate and refine chemical kinetic models relevant 
to nearly all terrestrial combustion systems. Simplified precursor experiments are 
underway in the MSG to provide interim data to the ACME investigators that 
complement the CIR experiments. 

=== PAGE 38 ===
38
Solid Fuel Combustion/Material Flammability
New initiatives are needed to allow ongoing, long-duration, solid fuel combustion 
testing in microgravity. A robust, ground-based solid fuel combustion program 
needs to be restarted to hone and augment the flight research portfolio. Many of 
the prior research results were obtained in ground-based tests, so this investment 
is well worth the modest price. The SoFIE insert in the CIR could continue to be 
used by additional NASA Research Announcement-selected principal investigators 
who wish to study solid fuel flammability and flame spread with different geometry 
fuels in a variety of oxygen, pressure, flow and external heat flux conditions. To 
further augment the solid fuel in-orbit test capability, a Microgravity Wind Tunnel 
for fire research is being proposed for the ISS MSG. This facility would enable large 
samples to be used to study fire growth patterns, materials flammability compared 
to NASA’s STD-6001 Test 1, fire suppression testing, and post-fire cleanup 
applied research. These two in-orbit facilities complement each other and provide 
different capabilities for principal investigator use—SoFIE can accommodate 
testing in exploration atmospheres with reduced pressure and elevated oxygen, and 
the Wind Tunnel can accommodate large samples and easy sample change out. 
This investment in future research will improve our ability to evaluate material 
flammability and fire risk in low gravity by increasing our understanding of the 
actual material flammability risk for practical materials and flow configurations 
expected on future spacecraft.
Figure 19. A chaotic mixture of flamelets in an intense turbulent flame obtained from sophisticated 3-D computations 
conducted at the Naval Research Labs.

=== PAGE 39 ===
39
Premixed Flames
Combustion experts agree that 
understanding premixed flames, the basic 
unit of combustion, is absolutely key to 
understanding turbulent combustion in 
general. Burners and engines based on 
fuel-lean mixtures promise higher thermal 
efficiencies and lower pollutant emissions 
because of reduced fuel consumption 
and more complete combustion of fuel 
in oxygen-rich environments. Real-life 
accidental explosions can originate from tiny 
kernels of barely flammable mixtures (Figure 
19). Conclusive settlements of the extinction 
limits, if they exist, are of paramount 
importance. Therefore, the resolution 
of issues related to the structure and 
behavior of premixed-gas flames has great 
significance for and can have a major impact 
on many fields ranging from automobiles 
to propulsion to fire safety, and even to 
our understanding into what might spark 
colossal explosions of Type Ia supernovae.
Although premixed flames are in the current 
baseline, no funding is allocated in the ISS 
budget for a specific experiment or insert 
on the ISS. It is anticipated that future 
studies of premixed flames will allow new 
exploration of the true limits of reactivity 
under limiting conditions and have 
application to both terrestrial combustion systems and the astrophysical modeling of 
stellar ignition and explosions. Perhaps the most important parameter in fundamental 
and practical premixed-gas combustion is the laminar burning velocity, defined as the 
propagation rate of a flame relative to the background gas, as it indicates the mixture‘s 
burning intensity as well as its propensity to exhibit such critical responses as blowout, 
flashback, and combustion instability. The fidelity of computational fluid dynamics 
Figure 20. Hydrothermal flame existing in a super-critical 
core region surrounded by a sub-critical annular region 
(Wellig, B., Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, Zurich).

=== PAGE 40 ===
40
(CFD) codes for combustor design and analysis is inherently tied to the reliability of 
laminar flame velocities, either built directly into the codes or, more frequently, used 
to calibrate the chemical models employed in the codes. 
Super-Critical Processes
Hydrothermal flames (e.g., Figure 20) are defined as regions where oxidation 
reactions occur in a super-critical water medium with sufficient intensity and rates 
as to produce luminous flames. They may be utilized to solve both of the major 
issues impacting SCWO mentioned earlier; i.e., surface fouling and flow blockage 
that is due to the precipitation of salts and corrosion of internal reactor surfaces. 
This may be accomplished by confining the flame to the interior of the reactor 
within a co-flowing region of sub-critical water. Any precipitated salts formed in 
the super-critical flame region will dissolve in the sub-critical fluid and the acidity 
is diluted, thereby eliminating both precipitate build-up on and corrosion of the 
reactor walls.
Ground-based studies of hydrothermal flames have focused primarily on laminar and 
turbulent diffusion flames. Major challenges remain in the understanding of heat and 
mass transport, chemical kinetics, the mixture equation-of-state and hydrodynamics 
associated with laminar and turbulent flows. Eliminating buoyancy will lead to an 
improved understanding of laminar and turbulent flames by controlling the flow rate 
independent of buoyant acceleration. For turbulent diffusion flames, eliminating 
buoyancy will eliminate its influence on the energetic large scales of turbulence 
allowing for the development of improved turbulent sub-models.
A SCWO research facility for the ISS to investigate the effects of buoyancy in 
SCWO reactors and to enable the progression of SCWO technology for NASA 
life support application to higher technology readiness levels (TRLs) has been 
proposed. It will have a reactor with an internal volume of approximately one liter, 
two orthogonal optical views and will be designed with a removable, principal-
investigator-specific reactor base to accommodate different injection and/or 
burner configurations. It is envisioned that the facility will be placed in an Express 
Rack and will require the build-up of new diagnostic hardware, comprising two 
cameras, a collimated backlight, a Raman spectrometer and an array of temperature, 
pressure and flow sensors. It will have a wide range of science objectives including 
studying the hydrodynamics of sub-critical and super-critical mixing, reaction zone 
characterization, heat transfer in super-critical fluids and precipitate transport in 
reacting super-critical water.

=== PAGE 41 ===
41
An alternative option with considerably less flexibility and scope has been proposed. 
It is termed the SCWO-D (for DEvice for the study of Critical LIquids and 
Crystallization [DECLIC]) and envisions build-up of an insert to be installed in the 
DECLIC facility. This option, because of the constraints imposed by fitting into an 
existing facility, will be limited in capability and will only be able to accomplish a 
subset of the science scope described above. The primary limiting features are: (i) 
the reactor volume (approximately 0.5 percent of Option 1), which limits the range 
of hydrodynamic studies (e.g., no bulk fluid motion); (ii) the diagnostic limitations 
that are due to the reliance on existing DECLIC hardware (e.g., no Raman 
spectroscopic diagnostic will eliminate chemical kinetic studies); (iii) a single optical 
axis, making simultaneous reaction zone and precipitate transport observations 
difficult if not impossible; and (iv) experiments may be limited to “quasi-steady” 
processes since constant pressure conditions will be difficult to maintain for any 
significant time because of the volume limitations.
New Initiatives
Besides the SoFIE and ACME experiments planned to be conducted in CIR on the 
ISS, there are a number of new combustion initiatives that are envisioned for future 
ISS research. Some of these may be undertaken more readily in the near term as spin-
offs of existing research since they require relatively smaller resources and hence may 
be faster to develop. New initiatives such as Cool Flames in CIR, NASA Flammability 
Test Campaign and Schlieren Diagnostic in MSG may fall into this category. 
Cool Flames would be an example of how one of the unprecedented findings of CIR-
FLEX studies can set the stage for a new research direction on combustion utilizing 
existing hardware available on the ISS. Cool Flames objectives include: (i) use a range 
of fuel types and environmental conditions (e.g., pressure, diluent concentrations, 
etc.) in order to determine the necessary pre-conditions for hot-flame/cool-flame 
transitions, cool flame stability and spontaneous re-ignition and (ii) development 
of a robust numerical modeling capability with detailed chemistry to complement 
analytical development of Cool Flame Theory. The initiative has great relevance to 
the next-generation engine designs such as Homogeneous Charged Compression 
Ignition and Reactivity Controlled Compression Ignition since these engines rely on 
low-temperature combustion processes, such as Cool Flames, to control emissions 
and reduce fuel consumption. This research also has significant impact on spacecraft 
fire safety concerns; reduced-gravity environments have been shown to be particularly 
conducive to a low-temperature combustion regime marked by very weak but 

=== PAGE 42 ===
42
persistent flames, invisible to the unaided eye, that will spontaneously re-ignite 
long after the visible flame has been extinguished. The necessary pre-conditions, the 
combustion chemistry, and the mechanisms for spontaneous re-ignition are poorly 
understood. The Cool Flames development effort would utilize existing FLEX-2 CIR/
MDCA hardware augmented with some additional diagnostic capabilities.
Other new initiatives currently envisioned include: 
• Clean-airLab: series of investigations directed toward carbon sequestration and 
pollution reduction.
• NanopropLab: self-assembling propellants and catalysts.
• CombustionLab: focusing on high pressures as related to (i) engines and (ii) 
supernova formation.
• CyberLab: focusing on developing a Fire Database Reference containing 
information on such things as transport measurements at flame conditions, 
flame speeds and chemical kinetics.
Microgravity combustion research has had significant impact on the combustion 
discipline and can be expected to continue to make strong contributions. Research 
directions in spacecraft fire safety have promise to significantly improve vehicle 
safety. The microgravity environment continues to be a critical resource for 
improved understanding of combustion phenomena. The combustion discipline has 
been very successful in utilizing low gravity to advance the field and is anxious to 
seek further opportunities.

=== PAGE 43 ===
43
Facilities and How 
to Choose Them
Acceleration Measurement and Environment Characterization
The terms microgravity, reduced gravity, low gravity, zero gravity and weightlessness 
are often used interchangeably to describe an environment where the gravitational 
body force is significantly less than that on Earth. This ambiguous description 
points to a question of how to measure and characterize a reduced-gravity 
environment and any disturbances. Disturbances in a microgravity environment 
are created by crew activities such as exercising, push-offs and landings, and simply 
opening and closing drawers and doors in addition to equipment operation, vehicle 
docking and undocking, thruster firings, and other movements. These disturbances 
must be measured to understand their impact on the data from scientific and 
engineering experiments.
The Space Acceleration Measurement System (SAMS) and the Microgravity 
Acceleration Measurement System (MAMS) provide continuous measurement of 
the ISS vibratory and quasi-steady acceleration environment, respectively. SAMS 
sensors measure acceleration levels using tri-axis accelerometers. SAMS flew on 
Mir from 1994 to 1998, continued on 20 shuttle missions and currently flies 
aboard the ISS. To complement SAMS, MAMS was developed to measure the 
very low-frequency disturbances (less than 0.01 hertz) that the SAMS sensors are 
unable to detect. Both SAMS and MAMS sensors have measured acceleration levels 
aboard the ISS since its establishment in 2001 and currently record acceleration 
disturbances in 21 unique locations aboard the ISS. SAMS measurement capability 
extends to all three laboratories, while MAMS data can be mathematically mapped 
to any arbitrary location using rigid-body assumptions.
SAMS and MAMS support NASA‘s Physical Sciences Research Program. These 
instruments, along with the Principal Investigator Microgravity Services (PIMS) 
project, serve a critical, ongoing role in support of vehicle loads and dynamics 
monitoring and assist technology developers and principal investigators in various 
disciplines. The goal is to characterize and understand the acceleration environment 
as related to a wide array of disturbances and events that routinely or uniquely take 
place on the ISS. 
Combustion Integrated Rack (CIR)
The CIR was designed to test experiments that focus on fire prevention, detection 
and suppression of fires in space. The hardware was delivered on STS-126 
(November 2008) to the ISS and installed in the U.S. Laboratory. The CIR 

=== PAGE 44 ===
44
provides a 100-liter chamber with eight optical windows with easily reconfigurable 
diagnostics, digital cameras and lighting with large data storage capability, gas 
distribution/cleanup, passive vibration isolation, and vacuum resources to support a 
wide range of gravity-dependent gaseous, liquid and solid combustion experiments. 
The current research program on gaseous fuels includes five experiments planned for 
the CIR on the ISS. These experiments are part of the ACME project where each 
will be conducted using a single modular set of hardware. The ACME experiments 
are focused on soot processes, flame stability and extinction, materials flammability 
and electric-field effects. In alphabetical order, the experiments, described in more 
detail above, include BRE, CLD Flame, E-FIELD Flames, Flame Design and 
Structure and Response of Spherical Diffusion Flames (s-Flame). The ACME set of 
experiments are expected to begin operating in 2016. As with their predecessors, 
the ACME experiments are all laminar diffusion flames. Two experiments take 
advantage of the microgravity environment by using a one-dimensional, spherical 
flame enveloping a porous spherical burner. Another experiment uses a porous plate 
burner, while the remaining two use a gas-jet flame configuration, both with and 
without a coaxial air flow.
The SoFIE flight hardware (Figure 10), involving combustion research on solid 
fuels, is currently under development as a CIR insert and planned for launch in 
2019. The SoFIE project is in the Science Definition phase to serve up to five 
separate investigations. These investigations all support the overall objective of the 
SoFIE project, which is to study and characterize ignition and flammability of solid 
spacecraft materials in practical geometries and realistic atmospheric conditions. 
The SoFIE insert in the CIR could continue to be used by additional NRA-selected 
private investigators who wish to study solid fuel flammability and flame spread 
with different geometry fuels in a variety of oxygen, pressure, flow and external heat 
flux conditions.
A brief summary of available mini-facilities/CIR inserts is tabulated in the Appendix. 
Microgravity Science Glovebox (MSG)
The MSG is a rack facility aboard the ISS in which fundamental and applied 
scientific research is conducted. The MSG has been operating on the ISS since July 
2002 and is located in the U.S. Laboratory. The unique design of the facility allows 
it to accommodate science and technology investigations in a workbench-type 
environment. The facility has an enclosed working volume that is held at a negative 

=== PAGE 45 ===
45
pressure with respect to the ISS pressurized volume. This allows the facility to 
provide two levels of containment for small parts, particulates, fluids and gases. This 
containment approach protects the crew from possible hazardous operations that 
take place inside the MSG work volume.
Research investigations operating inside the MSG are provided a large, 255-liter, 
enclosed work space, 1,000 watts of dc power via a versatile supply interface (120, 
28, + 12, and 5 Vdc), 1,000 watts of cooling capability, video and data recording 
and real-time downlink, ground commanding capabilities, access to ISS Vacuum 
Exhaust and Vacuum Resource Systems, and gaseous nitrogen supply. These 
capabilities make the MSG one of the most utilized science facilities on ISS. In 
fact, the MSG has been used for over 10,000 hours of scientific payload operations. 
MSG investigations involve research in cryogenic fluid management, fluid 
physics, spacecraft fire safety, materials science, combustion, plant growth, human 
health and life support technologies. The MSG facility is ideal for advancing our 
understanding of the role of gravity upon science investigations and research and to 
utilize the ISS as a technology platform for space exploration. 
The microgravity combustion research program has conducted the SAME project 
in 2007 and 2010, SPICE project in 2009, SLICE project in 2012, and has been 
running the BASS experiments since 2012 in the MSG facility. To further augment 
the solid-fuel, in-orbit test capabilities, a Microgravity Wind Tunnel for fire research 
is being proposed for the MSG in conjunction with the SoFIE project planned to 
be conducted in the CIR.
EXpedite the PRocessing of Experiments to Space Station 
(EXPRESS) Racks
The eight EXPRESS racks are multi-use facilities, which provide standard 
interfaces and resources for Middeck Locker and International Subrack Interface 
Standard Drawer Payloads. Payloads using single-, double-, or quad-locker 
configurations can be accommodated by these racks. The racks provide a number 
of services for payloads including nitrogen, vacuum, RS422, ethernet, video, and 
air- and water-cooling.
The proposed SCWO research facility to investigate the effects of buoyancy in 
SCWO reactors and to enable the progression of SCWO technology for NASA life 
support applications is envisioned to be placed in an EXPRESS Rack.

=== PAGE 46 ===
46
Telescience Support Center
The Telescience Support Center (TSC) was established in 1993 to provide ground 
support for shuttle experiments. With the development of the ISS in 2001, 
additional capabilities were needed to support new ISS experiments. During this 
time, the TSC was reconstructed and doubled in size. Currently, the TSC consists 
of 33 workstations that provide real-time audio and video downlinks allowing 
researchers to observe and control experimental operations aboard the ISS from 
the ground. The ISS video downlink provides a real-time view of the astronauts 
aboard the ISS interacting with the experiment. The TSC also allows researchers 
to operate and control experiments remotely with little astronaut interaction after 
the installation and setup of experimental hardware. The TSC supports projects 24 
hours a day, seven days a week; and since 2001, the TSC has logged over 26,000 
hours of continuous support of microgravity experiments aboard the ISS. The TSC 
continues to provide ground support to the ISS experiments today.

=== PAGE 47 ===
47
Complexity of the experiment should be minimized if at all possible. Science 
requirements that add complexity not only add additional cost to the development, 
but often lengthen the development time, making turnover an issue for both the 
project team and, in particular, for the principal investigator and his/her science 
team when the experiment timeline extends beyond the typical tenure of a Ph.D. 
student. It is strongly recommended to design the experiment to be flexible and 
repairable. Unlike the space shuttle experiment days, the International Space Station 
is very much like a laboratory on Earth and crew members gain good experimental 
skills while operating a particular experiment over months rather than just a week 
or so, and they can become quite adept at experiment repair if this capability is 
designed into the experiment and clear straightforward procedures are provided.
Although experiments in microgravity offer enticing rewards to combustion 
researchers, the harsh realities of experiments in reduced-gravity facilities present 
significant hardware and diagnostic challenges to scientists and engineers. Drop 
tower and space-based experiments have severe space, weight, volume, safety, 
and power limitations. The hidden benefit of these limitations have been the 
developments of technology with applications far beyond the microgravity 
combustion science program. Future capability needs for conducting combustion 
science in space certainly include advanced diagnostics, and supporting such needs 
requires more space and power.   
One of the most severe limitations of future space-based combustion science 
experiments is crew time. Astronaut availability is prioritized on the basis of many 
factors and the realistic assumption should be that it will remain as limited as it has 
been in the past. It is therefore extremely important that the space experiments be 
built with a capability for autonomous start, operation, and finish, and with as little 
maintenance as possible. The test matrices should be designed such that minimal 
crew interaction is necessary for fuel and oxygen supplies, sample and holder 
change-out, diagnostic adjustments, etc. 
Given these additional limitations beyond the challenges of the past, it is 
anticipated that upcoming, near-term NRA soliciting proposals for space 
experiments will be based on using existing hardware. NRA soliciting proposals to 
use larger, new hardware builds to enhance capability will be part of a long-term 
plan to follow in the future.
Developing and Flying 
Research on the ISS 

=== PAGE 48 ===
48
Supporting research in science and technology is an important part of NASA’s 
overall mission. NASA solicits research through the release of NASA Research 
Announcements (NRA), which cover a wide range of scientific disciplines. All NRA 
solicitations are facilitated through the web-based NASA Solicitation and Proposal 
Integrated Review and Evaluation System (NSPIRES) http://nspires.nasaprs.com/
external/. Registering with NSPIRES allows investigators to stay informed of newly 
released NRAs and enables submission of proposals. NSPIRES supports the entire 
lifecycle of NASA research solicitations and awards, from the release of new research 
calls through the peer review and selection process. 
In planning the scope of their proposal, investigators should be aware of available 
resources and the general direction guiding NASA research selection. NASA places 
high priority on recommendations from the 2011 National Research Council’s 
NRC Decadal Survey, which placed emphasis on hypothesis-driven spaceflight 
research. In addition, principal investigators (PI) should be aware that spaceflight 
experiments may be limited by a combination of power, crew time, or volume 
constraints. Launch and/or landing scrubs are not uncommon, and alternative 
implementation scenarios should be considered in order to reduce the risk from 
these scrubs.  Preliminary investigations using ground-based simulators may be 
necessary to optimize procedures before spaceflight. Also, many experiments require 
unique hardware to meet the needs of the spaceflight experiment.  To understand 
previous spaceflight studies, prospective PIs should familiarize themselves with the 
NASA ISS Program Science Office database, which discusses research previously 
conducted on the ISS, including that of the International Partners. A detailed 
catalog of previous, current, and proposed experiments, facilities, and results, 
including investigator information, research summaries, operations, hardware 
information, and related publications is available at www.nasa.gov/iss-science 
through the NASA ISS Program Office. Additionally, details pertaining to research 
previously supported by the Space Life and Physical Sciences Research and 
Applications Division of NASA’s Human Exploration and Operations Mission 
Directorate can be located in the Space Life & Physical Sciences Research and 
Applications Division Task Book in a searchable online database format at: https://
taskbook.nasaprs.com/Publication/welcome.cfm.   
What Should Principal 
Investigators Know About 
Conducting Research on 
the ISS?

=== PAGE 49 ===
49
There are various avenues that can result in funding for research to be conducted 
on the ISS, and the source of funding often dictates the availability of launch 
opportunities. Generally, funding for microbiology-related research is awarded 
through NASA-sponsored research announcements (NRA’s), ISS National 
Laboratory awards through other government agencies, private commercial 
enterprise, nonprofit organizations, and research awards sponsored by the ISS 
International Partners. It is not the responsibility of a researcher awarded an 
ISS flight experiment to fund costs associated with launch or the ISS laboratory 
facilities. Greater detail concerning current funding opportunities for ISS research 
can be found through the NASA ISS research website http://www.nasa.gov/
mission_pages/station/research/ops/research_information.html.
The NASA Solicitation and Proposed Integrated Review and Evaluation System 
(NSPIRES) can be accessed via http://nspires.nasaprs.com/external/.
Funding Opportunities/ 
Points of Contact
Dietrich, D. L., Ross, H. D., Shu, Y., Chang, P., and T’ien, J. S. (2000), 
“Candle flames in non-buoyant atmospheres,” Combustion Science and 
Technology, 156:1-24.
Dietrich, D. L., Haggard, J. B., Dryer, F. L., Nayagam, V., Shaw, B. D., and 
Williams, F. A. (1996), “Droplet combustion experiments in spacelab,” Proceedings 
of the Combustion Institute, 26:1201-1207.
Dotson, K. T., P. B. Sunderland, Z. G. Yuan, D. L. Urban, “Laminar Smoke Points 
of Coflowing Flames in Microgravity,” Fire Safety Journal 46, 2011, pp. 550-555.
Friedman, R. and Ross, H. D. (2001), “Microgravity Combustion: Fire in Free 
Fall,” Chapter 8: Combustion Technology and Fire Safety for Human-crew Space 
Missions, pages 525-562, Academic Press.
Greenberg, P.S., Klimek, R.B., and Buchele, D.R. (1995), “Quantitative Rainbow 
Schlieren Deflectometry,” Applied Optics 34(19), 3810-3822.
Greenberg, P.S., Ku, J.C., (1997) “Soot Volume Fraction Maps for Normal and 
Reduced Gravity Laminar Acetylene Jet Diffusion Flames,” Combustion and Flame 
108, 227-230.
Citations

=== PAGE 50 ===
50
Greenberg, P.S., Ku, J.C. (1997a) “Soot Volume Fraction Imaging,” Applied Optics 
36(22), 5514-5522.
Hegde, U., Zhou, L., and Bahadori, M.Y. (1994) “The Transition to Turbulence of 
Microgravity Gas Jet Diffusion Flames,” Combustion Science and Technology 102, 
95-113.
Law, C. K., Faeth, G. M., “Opportunities and Challenges of Combustion in 
Microgravity,” Progress in Energy and Combustion Science, Volume 20, Issue 1, 
1994, pp. 65-113.
Miller, F.J., Ross, H.D., Kim, I., and Sirignano, W.A. (2000) “Parametric 
Investigations of Pulsating Flame Spread Across 1-Butanol Pools,” Proceedings of 
the Combustion Institute 28, 2827-2834.
Musgrave, Gary E., Axel Larsen, Tommaso Sgobba, Safety Design for Space 
Systems, Butterworth-Heinemann, 2009.
Nayagam, V., Haggard, J. B., Colantonio, R. O., Marchese, A. J., Dryer, F. 
L., Zhang, B. L., and Williams, F. A. (1998). Microgravity n-heptane droplet 
combustion in oxygen-helium mixtures at atmospheric pressure. AIAA Journal, 
36(8):1369-1378.
Nayagam, V., Dietrich, D.L., Ferkul, P.V., Hicks, M.C., and Williams, F.A. (2012) 
“Can cool flames support quasi-steady alkane droplet burning?” Combustion and 
Flame, Vol. 159, 3583-3588.
Olson, S.L., Baum, H.R., and Kashiwagi, T. (1998) “Finger-like Smoldering over 
Thin Cellulosic Sheets in Microgravity,” Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 
27, 2525-2533.
Olson, S. L., Ferkul, P. V., and T’ien, J. S. (1988). Near-limit flame spread 
over a thin solid fuel in microgravity. Proceedings of the Combustion Institute, 
22:1213-1222.
Olson, S.L., Hegde, U., Bhattacharjee, S., Deering, J.L., Tang, L., and Altenkirch, 
R.A. (2004) “Sounding rocket microgravity experiments elucidating diffusive and 
radiative transport effects on flame spread over thermally thick solids,” Combustion 
Science and Technology176(4), 557-584.

=== PAGE 51 ===
51
Pearlman, H.G., and Ronney, P.D. (2994) “Near-limit Behavior of High Lewis-
number Premixed Flames in Tubes at normal and Low Gravity,” Physics of Fluids 6, 
4009-4018.
Qi, C., Chen, D., and Greenberg, P.S. (2008) “Fundamental Study of a 
Miniaturized Mini-disk Electrostatic Aerosol Precipitator for a Personal 
Nanoparticle Sizer,” Aerosol Science and Technology 42(7), 505-512.
Ronney, P.D., Wu, M.S., Pearlman, H.G. and Weiland, K.J. (1998) “Experimental 
Study of Flame Balls in Space: Preliminary Results from STS-83,” AIAA Journal 
36(8), 1361-1368.
Ross, H.D. and Miller, F.J. (1996) “Detailed Experiments of Flame Spread Across 
Deep Butanol Pools,” Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 26, 1327-1334.
Ross, H. D. (2001), Microgravity Combustion: Fire in Free Fall, Academic Press, 
London, England.
Ruff, G. A., Urban, D. L., Pedley, M. D., and Johnson, P. T. (2009), Safety Design 
for Space Systems, Chapter 27, Fire Safety, pages 829-883. Elsevier.
Urban, D.L., Yuan, Z.-G., Sunderland, P.B., Linteris, G.T., Voss, J.E., Lin, K.-
C., Dai, Z., Sun, K., and Faeth, G.M. (1998) “Structure and Soot Properties of 
Nonbuoyant Ethylene/Air Laminar Jet Diffusion Flames,” AIAA Journal 36(8), 
1346-1360.

=== PAGE 52 ===
52
A summary of available hardware and mini-facilities relevant for combustion 
research is given in the table below with some details as to the descriptive specs and 
operational parameters.
* MDCA mini-facility supports the following experiments: FLEX, FLEX-2, 
FLEX-ICE-GA, FLEX-2J (future)
** ACME mini-facility is planned to support the following experiments: BRE, 
CLD Flame, E-FIELD Flames, Flame Design, s-Flame 
*** SoFIE mini-facility is planned to support the following experiments: Flame 
Spread, GEL, Narrow Channel, SMμRF, MIST
# MSG mini-facility supports the following experiments: SPICE, SLICE, BASS 
Appendix 
MDCA*
ACME**
SoFIE***
MSG#
Up Mass (kg)
254
250
250
40
Volume (m3)
0.48
0.5
0.5
0.1
Power (kW)
0.73
0.75
0.75
0.05
Data Volume (GB)
72
72
72
10
Diagnostics
analog color camera, 
radiometer, low light level 
UV camera, two HiBMs 
cameras
radiometers, two color 
cameras, low light level UV 
camera, two HiBMs cameras, 
photomultiplier tubes, ion 
current measurement, gas 
chromatograph
same as ACME
digital still camera, 
video camera, air flow, 
fuel flow, radiometer
TSC capable
yes
yes
yes
yes
On-orbit
yes
no
no
yes
POC Name
Mark Hickman
Mark Hickman
Mark Hickman
Robert Hawersaat
POC Number
216.977.7105
216.977.7105
216.977.7105
216.433.8157

=== PAGE 53 ===
53
ACME	
Advanced Combustion via Microgravity Experiments
BASS	
Burning and Suppression of Solids
BRE	
Burning Rate Emulator
CIR	
Combustion Integrated Rack
CFD	
Computational fluid dynamics
CLD	
Coflow Laminar Diffusion
CM	
Combustion Module
CNES	
French Space Agency
DECLIC	
DEvice for the study of Critical LIquids and Crystallization
E-FIELD	
Electric-Field Effects on Laminar Diffusion
ELF	
Enclosed Laminar Flames 
EXPRESS	
EXpedite the Processing of Experiments to Space Station
FLEX	
Flame Extinguishment Experiment
GRC	
Glenn Research Center
HTI	
High Temperature Insert
HTI-R	
High Temperature Insert (refurbished)
ISS	
International Space Station
LOI	
Limiting Oxygen Index
LSP	
Laminar Soot Processes
MAMS	
Microgravity Acceleration Measurement System
MDCA	
Multi-user Droplet Combustion Apparatus
MSG	
Microgravity Science Glovebox
PIMS	
Principal Investigator Microgravity Services
PMMA	
Polymethylmethacrylate
POC	
Point of Contact
SAME	
Smoke Aerosol Measurement Experiment
SAMS	
Space Acceleration Measurement System
SCWM	
Super-Critical Water Mixture
SCWO	
Super-Critical Water Oxidation
SEA	
Space Exploration Atmospheres
SLICE	
Structure & Liftoff In Combustion Experiment
SOFBALL	
Structure of Flame Balls at Low Lewis-number
SoFIE	
Solid Fuel Ignition and Extinction
SPICE	
Smoke Point In Coflow Experiment
TGDF	
Turbulent Gas-jet Diffusion Flame
TSC	
Telescience Support Center
ZGF	
Zero Gravity Facility
Acronyms

=== PAGE 54 ===
54
54
The Complete ISS Researcher’s 
Guide Series
1.	
Acceleration Environment
2.	
Cellular Biology
3.	
Combustion Science
4.	
Earth Observations
5.	
Fluid Physics
6. 	 Fruit Fly Research
7.	
Fundamental Physics
8.	
Human Research
9.	
Macromolecular Crystal Growth
10.	 Microbial Research
11.	 Microgravity Materials Research
12.	 Plant Science
13.	 Rodent Research
14.	 Space Environmental Effects
15.	 Technology Demonstration

=== PAGE 55 ===
55
55
For more information...
Space Station Science
http://www.nasa.gov/iss-science
Facilities
http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/station/research/
facilities_category.html
ISS Interactive Reference Guide
http://www.nasa.gov/externalflash/ISSRG/index.htm
Researchers/Opportunities
http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/station/research/
ops/research_information.html
ISS Research Customer Helpline
JSC-ISS-research-helpline@mail.nasa.gov
281-244-6187

=== PAGE 56 ===
56
National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Johnson Space Center
http://www.nasa.gov/centers/johnson
www.nasa.gov
NP-2015-10-034-JSC 
