
=== PAGE 1 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
1 
 
 
Advanced Combustion via Microgravity Experiments (ACME) 
Flame Design 
 
 
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023*) 
 
 
Prepared by: 
Dennis P. Stocker, NASA Glenn Research Center 
dennis.p.stocker@nasa.gov, 216-433-2166 
Prof. Richard L. Axelbaum, Washington University in St. Louis 
Prof. Peter B. Sunderland, University of Maryland 
Dr. Phillip H. Irace, Mainstream Engineering Corp. (formerly Washington U. in St. Louis) 
 
 
Example flame images, where this composite appeared in the 2021 NASA Science calendar  
and the Oct. 2022 issue of the National Geographic Magazine. 
 
 
*Data analysis and the publication of results is still underway, so it is expected that this 
report will be updated in the future with at least a revision of the list of papers and 
presentations. 

=== PAGE 2 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
2 
 
 
Table of Contents 
       Page 
1. Overview 
3  
2. Science Overview 
 3 
A. Background 
3 
B. Rationale for Microgravity 
5 
C. Science Objectives  
8 
D. Science Success Criteria 
8 
3. Hardware Overview 
9 
A. General Description 
9 
B. Hardware Shortcomings 
18 
4. Preliminary Results 
19 
A. Changed Test Plans 
19 
B. Overview of Experiment Test Operations 
20 
C. Summary of Preliminary Results 
25 
D. Surprises and New Discoveries 
26 
E. Accomplishment of Approved Objectives 
27 
F. Additional Objectives Achieved 
27 
G. Impacts, Benefits, and Products 
27 
H. Patents 
27 
5. Follow-On Experiments 
27 
6. Appendices 
28 
A. Abbreviations and Acronyms 
28 
B. 30-Day Operational Accomplishments Report for ISS Increments 59 and 60 
31 
C. 30-Day Operational Accomplishments Report for ISS Increment 66 
42 
D. Operational Timeline 
55 
E. Astronauts who Conducted ISS Operations for Flame Design 
57 
F. ISS Operations per the Payload Weekly Science Summary 
58 
G. Crew Activity per Space Station Science Highlights 
73 
H. Crew Activity per the ISS Daily Summary Report 
77 
I. 
Crew Activity per the NASA Space Station Blog 
82 
J. Crew Activity in Publicly Available NASA Photos 
83 
K. ACME Operations per @ISS_Research on Twitter 
84 
L. ACME Operations per Astronauts on Twitter 
92 
M. Summary of the ISS data collection 
93 
N. Publications, Presentations, Awards, and Outreach 
94 
1. Publications and Presentations with ISS Results 
94 
2. Publications and Presentations (comprehensive list) 
95 
3. General ACME Papers and Presentations 
102 
4. Awards 
104 
5. Outreach 
108 
 
 
 
 
 
 

=== PAGE 3 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
3 
 
 
1. Overview 
The Flame Design experiment is one of six independent experiments that make up the Advanced 
Combustion via Microgravity Experiments (ACME) project for which the tests were conducted within the 
Combustion Integrated Rack (CIR) on the International Space Station (ISS).   
 
The experiment’s Principal Investigator (PI) is Prof. Richard L. Axelbaum of the Washington University of 
St. Louis’s Dept. of Energy, Environmental & Chemical Engineering.  The Co-Investigator (Co-I) is Prof. 
Peter B. Sunderland of the University of Maryland’s Dept. of Fire Protection Engineering.  The ISS research 
also benefitted greatly from the work of Phillip H. Irace who was a doctoral student at the Washington 
University of St. Louis throughout the on-orbit operations. 
 
Meanwhile, Dennis P. Stocker of the NASA Glenn Research Center is the Project Scientist (PS) for ACME 
including Flame Design and the rest of the ACME investigations.  In ACME’s preparatory drop testing, etc., 
Dr. Fumiaki Takahashi of the Case Western Reserve University (CWRU) served as the Deputy Project 
Scientist.  For ACME’s spaceflight operations, the NASA science team included Drs. Uday G. Hegde and 
Vedha Nayagam who are also with CWRU. 
 
The ISS operations for Flame Design were conducted in two rounds of testing which occurred in April-July 
2019 and Oct. 2021 to Feb. 2022.  The two rounds occurred during Increments 59/60 and 66 and 
respectively featured normal and inverse flames.  The inverse flame tests were conducted with the 
chamber filled with a mixture of nitrogen and ethylene (C2H4) while an oxygen/nitrogen mixture flowed 
from the burner.  As a result, the inverse flames were effectively inside out, e.g., where the soot formed 
outside rather than inside of the flames.  As a notable exception, the first day of testing in the second 
round was carried out in the normal flame configuration, with propane (with or without nitrogen) flowing 
into an oxygen/nitrogen atmosphere.  The tests on that day were conducted with the long (near) 
thermocouple rake to acquire data to calibrate optical measurements of the flame temperature through 
Thin Filament Pyrometry (TFP).  Meanwhile, the short (far) thermocouple rake was used on all other Flame 
Design test days. 
 
Except for the single propane (C3H8) test day previously mentioned, all ISS tests were conducted with the 
fuel ethylene (C2H4), the inert nitrogen, and the spherical flame configuration.  While other conditions had 
been identified as desired, NASA’s intent was focused rather comprehensive research. 
 
 
2. Science Overview 
A. Background 
This background is the Executive Summary from the experiment’s Science Requirements Document 
(SRD) of April 2010. 
 
The majority of practical combustion processes involve nonpremixed combustion of 
hydrocarbons.  These processes must be efficient and the resulting emissions low.  For example, 
soot production, which can adversely affect efficiency, emissions, and equipment lifetime, must 
be controlled, and flame extinction must be avoided.  Many methods have been considered to 
reduce soot, such as increasing strain rates and inert concentrations and reducing pressures, but 
these techniques generally weaken flames, leading to performance penalties and possible 
extinction.  The proposed study considers a novel method of approaching combustion to address 

=== PAGE 4 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
4 
 
 
these concerns.  The approach is termed flame design, as it takes a fundamental understanding 
of diffusion flames and, within the inherent constraints imposed, designs flames that best 
optimize efficiency and minimize pollutants. 
 
Flame design involves affecting the basic structure of the flame in that the relationship between 
the temperature and concentration fields is varied to accomplish a stated objective.  The method 
involves exchanging nitrogen (or any inert, including carbon dioxide) from the oxidizer stream to 
the fuel stream such that the stoichiometric mixture fraction, Zst, can be varied with or without 
affecting adiabatic flame temperature, Tad.  The structure of a high Zst flame is substantially 
different from that of the standard hydrocarbon/air flame, where Zst is relatively low.  By varying 
Zst at constant Tad, flames have been produced that are soot-free at any strain rate (permanently 
blue) and have extinction scalar dissipation rates up to 40 times those of their fuel-air 
counterparts. 
 
The nitrogen exchange approach (or some variant of it) has been the subject of many studies by 
the PI and Co-Is (Du and Axelbaum, 1995, 1996, Chao et al., 1998, Sunderland et al., 2003, 2004, 
Liu et al., 2005, Chen and Axelbaum, 2005, Kumfer et al., 2006, 2008, Santa et al., 2007a, 2007b, 
Skeen et al., 2009) and other investigators (Sung et al., 1995; Lin and Faeth, 1996; Kang et al., 
1997; Hwang and Chung, 2001).  Although these studies have been informative, they typically 
involved normal-gravity flames, where buoyancy and inherent strain complicated the 
interpretation of results.  For example, these ambiguities have led to different theories to explain 
the phenomenon of permanently-blue diffusion flames.  It is not known whether this 
phenomenon is due more to a change in the direction of convection across the flame or to a 
change in the detailed structure of the flame.  This issue can be addressed by performing 
microgravity experiments because the unique character of nonbuoyant microgravity flames 
allows the effects of convection direction and flame structure to be independently varied.  By 
ejecting fuel into an oxidizer in a buoyancy free system, the convective flow across the flame is 
unambiguously from fuel to oxidizer.  Alternatively, by ejecting oxidizer into fuel, the flow is from 
oxidizer to fuel.  Furthermore, the long residence times that can be obtained in the spherical flame 
geometry will allow for validation of a theory that predicts the sooting limits at the limit of infinite 
Damköhler number, Da. 
 
Studies of the effect of Zst on scalar dissipation rate at extinction have indicated that there is a 
unique Zst where the flame is most resistant to extinction.  These findings also suggest that by 
employing inert exchange to vary Zst, the peak temperature can be shifted to coincide with the 
location of radical production, thus allowing the flame to burn at much lower temperatures.  The 
optimum minimum temperature at extinction has led us to propose the concept of a pseudo-
flammability limit for nonpremixed flames.  Again, this fundamental information is most 
unambiguously demonstrated in quasi-steady, microgravity flames wherein the effects of flame 
structure can be systematically studied. 
 
The proposed work will also allow, for the first time, a strain-free experimental study of the effects 
of Zst on soot inception and flame extinction processes.  Microgravity experiments will involve 
gaseous hydrocarbon diffusion flames supported on porous spherical burners and coflow 
burners.1  Soot inception limits and flame extinction limits will be obtained as functions of Zst, 
amount of inert, flow direction, and pressure.  Extensive analytical and computational modeling 

=== PAGE 5 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
5 
 
 
will support the experimental investigation.  Models will include gas-phase and burner-surface 
radiation. 
 
Specifically, soot-inception limits in spherical flames will be measured by establishing a flame at a 
given Zst and allowing peak temperature to decrease with time until the yellow luminosity is 
eliminated.  The effect of flow direction across the flame will be studied by performing coflow 
experiments (desired) where the fuel issues into the oxidizer and oxidizer issues into fuel.  Gas 
temperatures will be measured by thin film pyrometry and thermocouples to identify the soot-
inception temperature. 
 
In addition, soot volume fraction measurements will be made to evaluate the effects of Zst and 
flow direction on soot formation and growth, and to better understand the phenomena of 
permanently-blue flames.  Flame extinction limits will also be studied in a manner similar to that 
of soot inception limits, and temperatures near extinction will be measured. 
 
The experiments and modeling will yield unique data that will allow for an understanding of how 
Zst affects soot-inception and flame extinction and how Zst can be used to design optimum 
flames.  In addition, the effects of flow direction will also be studied and the importance of flow 
direction and flame structure to permanently-blue flames will be assessed.  Finally, the proposed 
concept of a pseudo-flammability limit for nonpremixed flames will be evaluated and these limits 
will be ascertained for the test fuels.  These results will be useful for the development of future 
combustion devices that will take advantage of oxygen enrichment technology to design more 
stable and less polluting flames. 
__________________________ 
1 The coflow flame experiments are desired.  This means that many critical goals of the 
experiments can be obtained without these experiments but they would add great value to the 
results. 
 
B. Rationale for Microgravity 
This is the ‘Justification for Extended Duration Microgravity’ section (2.5) of the experiment’s SRD 
from April 2010.  References and the appendices are not included in this document but can be 
found in the SRD.  The included equation is formatted differently in this copy. 
 
Previous ground-based microgravity experiments have demonstrated the value of the spherical, 
burner-supported nonpremixed flames for flame studies.  The one-dimensional flame offers a 
simple, fundamental configuration to improve our understanding of nonpremixed flame behavior 
and to explore such effects as radiation and thermophoresis, which are more pronounced under 
microgravity conditions (Atreya et al., 1992, Law et al., 2001).  The burner-supported spherical 
flame is in some respects similar to droplet burning but it holds the advantages that larger flames 
are possible and, with sufficiently long time, can approach quasi-steady state.  Furthermore, the 
proposed microgravity coflow flames allow the direction of convection across the flame to be 
varied. 
 
Although the spherically-symmetric flame geometry has many advantages, it is not practical to 
produce such a flame at normal gravity.  The reason for this can be understood by considering the 
Richardson number, Ri, which is the ratio of the buoyancy force to the inertial force and is given 
by 

=== PAGE 6 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
6 
 
 
 
Ri = g (ΔT L) / (T u2) . 
(2.1) 
Here g is the acceleration of gravity, T is temperature, L is the characteristic length scale, and u 
burner surface, and ΔΤ = (Tad – Tb), we find that Ri is on the order of 1000 in normal gravity.  In 
fact, it is much higher than this because the more appropriate length and velocity scales are the 
flame diameter and the velocity at the flame, respectively.  The value of Ri can be reduced by 
judicious choice of fuels and inert; Law et al. (2001) have shown that nearly spherical flames can 
be created in normal gravity.  However, Ri for these flames is still on the order of unity, implying 
that while the flames appear spherical, natural convection is still present.  Furthermore, hydrogen 
must be used as a fuel and be supplied in the ambient so such flames are not relevant to this 
study.  A reduction in Ri can be achieved by reducing the flame size, but substantial reduction in 
L is not practical because our goal is to produce a flame that is sufficiently large that its structure 
can be characterized.  Furthermore, heat loss to the burner would be excessive for small flames.  
Consequently, for general fuels and inerts the only practical method of obtaining Ri << 1 is to 
reduce g by four orders of magnitude.  This can be accomplished in a number of microgravity 
environments, including ground-based facilities, e.g., drop towers for short times, as well as flight 
experiments, e.g., the International Space Station for longer times.  A quantitative evaluation of 
the acceptable g levels for these experiments is given in Appendix A and is discussed below. 
 
The drop-tower results detailed in Section 1.3 have demonstrated the value of the spherically-
symmetric burner stabilized flame.  The ability to reverse flow direction has helped to elucidate 
the dominant mechanism responsible for permanently-blue flames, yet the results are not 
conclusive because transient effects could dominate these observations.  Transient effects arise 
from two sources: the ignition process and the long times required for spherical microgravity 
flames to reach quasi-steady state.  The ignition process is not spherically symmetric and thus 
there is an asymmetry imposed by ignition that must be damped out.  More importantly, soot 
particles that are created during ignition can be trapped in the interior of the flame due to 
thermophoresis.  The particles are trapped for the same reasons that a soot shell is produced in 
microgravity droplet combustion (Choi et al., 1991, Avedisian and Callahan, 2000).  Thus, it is 
possible for soot to exist in flames after the ignition event even though the flame has ceased 
producing soot. 
 
The reason the spherically-symmetric burner-stabilized flame takes so long to reach quasi-steady 
state is that the radial velocity scales with 1/r2.  Thus, at only a few burner diameters away from 
the sphere, diffusion is the dominant mechanism of transport. Since the characteristic diffusion 
time τd is given by r2/D, τd is on the order of tens of seconds a few centimeters from the burner.  
Decreasing the flame size will decrease the size of the thermal field and, consequently, the time 
to reach quasi-steady state, but there are limits to the minimum flame size that is possible.  These 
limits are imposed by the need to avoid heat loss to the burner and ensure flame sphericity.  
Experiments performed in the 5 s drop facility indicate that for many of the run conditions needed 
for the proposed experiments the flame is still growing significantly after 5 s.  Analytical (see 
Appendix A) and numerical calculations predict that up to 30 s of jitter-free (less than 10-5 g) 
microgravity is needed to approach quasi-steady state for these run conditions.  No ground-based 
facilities are available to accomplish this. 
 
In some ways, the spherical flame experiments are the nonpremixed analog to premixed flame 
balls because in both systems diffusion dominates the development of the far field temperature 
distribution.  Therefore, this work is subject to the same needs as SOFBALL (Ronney et al., 1998) 

=== PAGE 7 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
7 
 
 
in that long duration microgravity is needed and g-jitter must be negligible because the thermal 
field is very large and convection is small, i.e., Ri is large even for small g. 
 
To provide a quantitative assessment of the 
acceptable gravity level, an analysis was 
performed, as detailed in Appendix A.  In this 
analysis, the acceleration induced on a fluid 
packet by natural convection is formulated by 
considering a gravitational acceleration given by 
a sinusoidal function.  The resulting acceleration 
function for the fluid packet is next integrated to 
obtain the gravity induced flow velocity.  This 
velocity can be converted to an additional mass 
flux that transports the flame front and causes 
distortion of the flame.  By specifying the 
maximum percentage of distortion allowed in 
the experiment (10% here), the acceptable 
gravity level is determined, and this result is 
given in Fig. 2.1 for the four flames of Table 1.1.  
As shown, the required g levels are on the order 
of 10 μg.  This is too for microgravity aircraft, but 
is consistent with the anticipated environment 
of the Combustion Integrated Rack (CIR).  Finally, 
it is important to emphasize that the proposed 
experiments illustrate an important and novel 
use of microgravity for combustion research.  In 
microgravity we are able to hold Zst fixed and in 
coflow tests vary the direction of convection 
through the flame.  There are no analogous 
experiments at 1g that can accomplish this. 
 
Experiments have been performed in normal gravity coflow flames to understand the effects of 
flame structure and flow direction on soot formation (Kumfer et al., 2006, 2008, Skeen et al., 
2009).  As mentioned previously, owing to the effects of buoyancy on the flow field, the flow 
direction cannot be prescribed in normal gravity coflow flames as it can in microgravity spherical 
flames or microgravity coflow flames.  For example, it is well known that for fuel issuing into an 
ambient of air, buoyancy accelerates the flow field and causes the streamlines to be from oxidizer 
to fuel in the lower regions of the flame and from fuel to oxidizer in the upper regions (Santoro et 
al., 1987).  The importance of buoyancy to the flow field will vary with Zst because the velocity 
and thus Ri are strongly affected by dilution. In other words, the relative amount of entrainment 
will vary with Zst in buoyant flames.  Thus, normal gravity flames have ambiguities with respect 
to flow direction as Zst is varied.  Nonetheless, coflow flames have been valuable in confirming 
the role of Zst on flame structure and the effects of residence time on soot inception (Kumfer et 
al., 2006, 2008, Skeen et al., 2009). 
 
Microgravity gas jet flames in quiescent surroundings have been observed in drop towers and the 
Space Shuttle and the results have revealed significant differences between the two in terms of 

=== PAGE 8 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
8 
 
 
sooting behavior, suggesting that the drop tower results were far from steady state (Urban et al., 
1998).  Velocities in coflow flames are similar to those in gas jet flames in quiescent environments. 
Therefore the impact of buoyancy on coflow flames is expected to have a similar impact to that 
reported in Urban et al. (1998).  Thus, drop tower coflow experiments are not a viable option for 
studying quasi-steady microgravity coflow flames.  The characteristic times in these flames are 
long and thus the scalar fields develop much slower that in normal gravity, indicating that long 
duration microgravity is needed. 
 
C. Science Objectives 
The proposed objectives text presented here is the ‘Experimental Objectives’ section (2.3) of the 
experiment’s SRD from April 2010.  Desired ISS testing with the fuel methane (CH4), inert carbon 
dioxide (CO2), and coflow flame configuration was not conducted. 
 
Thus motivated, the primary objectives of this flight experiment are listed here in priority order: 
A. Obtain soot-inception limits of quasi-steady normal and inverse spherical diffusion flames 
as functions of flow rate, Zst, amount of inert (N2 or CO2**), and pressure** for C2H4 and 
CH4 flames.  Identify the corresponding temperatures in hot regions. Obtain similar limits 
and temperatures for inverse and normal coflow flames**. 
B. Obtain detailed measurements in quasi-steady normal and inverse spherical diffusion 
flames for C2H4 and CH4*.  Determine the effects of flow rate, Zst, amount of inert (N2 or 
CO2**), and pressure** on flame temperature, size, color, and soot volume fraction.  
Evaluate the possible existence of steady flames. Obtain similar measurements for inverse 
and normal coflow flames**. 
C. Obtain extinction limits as functions of Zst, amount of inert (N2 or CO2**), and pressure** 
for normal and inverse spherical C2H4 and CH4 flames.  Identify the corresponding 
temperatures in hot regions.  Identify the presence of radiative or kinetic extinction. 
Evaluate whether pseudo-flammability limits can be obtained for these flames.  Measure 
blowoff limits for inverse and normal coflow flames**. 
*desired; **highly desired. 
 
D. Science Success Criteria 
This text is from the Flame Design portion of the ‘Success Criteria’ section of the ACME Integrated 
Science Requirements Document (ISRD, ACME-SRD-001.B) from Sept. 2013, which is revision B of 
the version prepared for the Requirements Definition Review (RDR).    Desired ISS testing with the 
fuel methane (CH4), inert carbon dioxide (CO2), and coflow flame configuration was not 
conducted.  And while the chamber pressure was varied in ISS testing, tests were not conducted 
at pressures as low as 0.2 atm (specified below under 6.3.3). 
 
6.3.1. Minimum Success 
-  
Obtain color video of one normal and one inverse spherical flame that passes its sooting 
limit, passes its radiative extinction limit, and has a total burn time that exceeds 20 s. 
-  
Obtain color video of three spherical flames of C2H4 flowing into air as a functions of time 
and m. 
6.3.2. Complete Success (i.e., completion of required test matrix) 
All of the above plus: 
-  
Perform tests NS1 – 32 and IS1 – 32 or a similar set of spherical flame tests. 

=== PAGE 9 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
9 
 
 
-  
Obtain soot inception limits and extinction limits for normal and inverse spherical flames 
as functions of Zst and Tad. 
-  
Measure peak temperatures as a function of time and m for normal and inverse spherical 
flames. 
-  
Measure temperature distributions at (or near) the sooting and extinction limits of normal 
and inverse spherical flames. 
-  
Measure soot volume fraction profiles for normal and inverse spherical diffusion flames 
at low and high Zst. 
6.3.3. Superior Success (desired) 
All of the above plus: 
-  
Obtain color video, soot inception limits, and extinction limits of normal and inverse 
coflow flames at quasi-steady conditions as a function of m, Zst and Tad. 
-  
Obtain soot inception limits and extinction limits with CO2 diluent as functions of Zst and 
Tad for normal and inverse spherical and coflow flames. 
-  
Obtain soot inception limits and extinction limits for C2H4 as functions of Zst and Tad for 
normal and inverse spherical and coflow flames at pressures of 0.2 and 0.5 atm. 
-  
Obtain soot inception limits and extinction limits for CH4 as functions of Zst and Tad for 
normal and inverse spherical and coflow flames. 
 
 
3. Hardware Overview 
A. General Description 
Except for limited updates and clarifications in the boxed notes, this section is copied from section 
2.A of the April 2021 version of ‘ACME Engineering Implementation’ which should be consulted for 
additional details. 
 
This section provides a general description of the ACME engineering from the ‘3.0 Experimental’ 
section of the following 2014 conference paper: 
Dennis P. Stocker, Fumiaki Takahashi, J. Mark Hickman, and Andrew C. Suttles, “Gaseous 
Non-Premixed Flame Research Planned for the International Space Station,” Spring 
Technical Meeting of the Central States Section of the Combustion Institute, Tulsa, OK, 16–
18 March 2014. 
 
IMPORTANT: The 2104 paper, from which this section was extracted, proceeded completion of the 
spaceflight hardware which was mostly launched in 2017.  As a result, it does not accurately 
describe the final engineering in some regards.   Therefore updates, clarifications, additional 
details, shortcomings, references, etc. have been included in boxed notes like this following the 
original description.  As a minor note, the sizes of figures were adjusted in this report, but none 
were cropped. 
 
As previously discussed, the ACME experiments will be conducted within the Combustion 
Integrated Rack (CIR) using a chamber insert, depicted in Figure 2, which was designed to 
accommodate gas delivery to a variety of exchangeable burners.  Besides the chamber insert, 
other ACME-unique hardware includes a high-definition color camera and an avionics package, 
which is for data acquisition and control. 
 

=== PAGE 10 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
10 
 
 
 
Figure 2: Design of the Advanced Combustion via Microgravity Experiments (ACME) chamber 
insert that will be used in the Combustion Integrated Rack (CIR) on ISS. 
 
ACME’s chamber insert, which is ~0.4 m in diameter, provides common mounting for a variety of 
burners on the chamber axis (but only one at a time) and includes a retracting resistive igniter.  As 
depicted in Figure 3, there will initially be gas-jet burners (with inner diameters ranging from 0.4 
to 3.2 mm), a small coflow burner (where the two concentric tubes have inner diameters of 2.1 
and 25 mm), porous spherical burners (with diameters ranging from 6.35 to 12.7 mm), and two 
flat porous burners for the BRE experiment (with inner diameters of 25 and 50 mm).  Most burners 
will be equipped with a surface thermocouple, and each BRE burner will have two heat flux 
transducers.  The internal pressure of the porous burners will be measured to allow monitoring 
of the pressure differential across the outlet surface.  The igniter will have a crew-exchangeable 
tip and arm (to accommodate the various burners) and its stepper-motor drive will allow for 
precise positioning. 
 
 
Figure 3: ACME burner types, including from left to right, gas-jet burners, a co-flow burner, 
porous spherical burners, and flat porous burners for the BRE experiment. 
 
Ultimately, the spherical burners were limited to a single diameter of 6.35 mm, and the fabricated 
gas-jet burners were limited to two sizes with nominal inner diameters of 1.3 and 2.1 mm.  

=== PAGE 11 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
11 
 
 
However, only the larger gas-jet burner was used during the spaceflight tests.  The burners are 
addressed in detail in section 3.C of the ACME Engineering Implementation report. 
 
Unfortunately, the spherical burners did not always yield spherically symmetric flames, 
presumably because of (1) greater burner flow through the joint between the porous sphere and 
supply tube, and (2) heat loss to the support tube (encompassing the supply tube) causing local 
flame quenching. 
 
Two types of igniter tips have been used during ACME testing.  Most tests have been conducted 
using a loop igniter tip like those which had been successfully used in the droplet combustion 
experiments which preceded ACME research in the CIR.  However, some tests were conducted with 
a coil igniter tip, where that included the CFI-G investigation and the second-round testing for 
Flame Design, Burning Rate Emulator (BRE), and Structure and Response of Spherical Diffusion 
Flames (s-Flame), with the exception of the latter’s first day testing.  For more information about 
the igniter tips, see section 3.D of the ACME Engineering Implementation report. 
 
The chamber insert includes three mass flow controllers (visible on the left of Fig. 2) for the 
delivery of fuel, oxidizer or inert (e.g., helium or carbon dioxide), and nitrogen to the burner.  The 
maximum fuel flow is 2 slpm (on a nitrogen basis), whereas much higher flows, e.g., 10 slpm (on 
a nitrogen basis), are possible for the oxidizer and nitrogen lines.  The crew can exchange the mass 
flow controllers to provide appropriate ranges that maximize the flow accuracy.  The gas delivery 
system enables on-orbit dilution of the fuel or oxidizer (but not both simultaneously), coflow, 
inverse flames (e.g., oxidizer delivery to the center of a coflow burner), and premixed flames, 
although the latter are not planned for any of the current ACME experiments.  Gases can also be 
delivered premixed to the space station where that is necessary in some circumstances, such as 
the blending of different fuel gases.  CIR’s standard bottle sizes are 1, 2.25, and 3.8 liters but ACME 
will sometimes use smaller bottles as a hazard control to limit the deficient reactant (e.g., fuel) 
that can be released into the combustion chamber. 
 
ACME tests were not conducted with carbon dioxide as a diluent.  Furthermore, the fuel diluted 
with helium (for s-Flame) was premixed prior to launch rather than on orbit.  Ultimately, oxidizer 
flows of up to 20 slpm (on a nitrogen basis) were possible, while the nitrogen flow was limited to 
a maximum of 5 slpm.  ACME did not use gas bottles smaller than 1 liter as indicated above; the 
bottle fill pressure was instead limited as an additional hazard control. 
 
ACME’s primary flame diagnostics are a suite of imaging systems including five video cameras and 
two illumination systems, of which three cameras are part of the CIR facility and are already in 
use on orbit.  All but one of the cameras is mounted outside of the chamber.  Collectively, the 
imaging systems will enable color, CH*, and OH* imaging; pyrometry; measurement of the soot 
volume fraction; and operational support.  However, it is unlikely that all functions would be 
exercised at any one time as will become apparent in the subsequent discussion. 
 
Color imaging is provided by two cameras: a high-definition digital camera mounted outside of 
the chamber and a standard analog camera mounted on the chamber insert (with a turning 
mirror).  Both cameras are part of the ACME hardware that is now in development.  The analog 
camera signal will be downlinked in near real time to support the experiment operations.  Light-
emitting diodes within the chamber can be used to illuminate the igniter and burner to both 

=== PAGE 12 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
12 
 
 
support the operations and provide reference images.  The 12-bit digital camera records at up to 
30 full frames (1360x1024) per second, and is equipped with a motorized lens with independent 
control of the zoom, iris, and focus.  The digital camera will be equipped with a filter assembly 
with four options, where selection of a clear “filter” allows for color imaging.  Color imaging can 
also be carried out with a blue-green BG7 Schott glass filter, which balances the color planes to 
avoid saturation in the red while maintaining sensitivity in the blue and green.  The natural flame 
color can be approximately reconstructed, but the primary purpose of the filter is pyrometry and 
measurement of the soot volume fraction, again via the techniques of [23-24].  Alternately, CH* 
imaging can be conducted with this camera because the filter assembly includes a 430-nm 
bandpass filter with a 10-nm full width at half-maximum transmission (FWHM).  A 450-nm 
bandpass filter (again with a 10-nm FWHM) can be used with the CH* filter to effectively subtract 
interfering broadband soot emission.  However, the filter assembly rotates slowly so such 
subtraction effectively requires a separate test with each filter and of course reproducible flame 
conditions. 
 
The video from the analog operations (i.e., ops) camera, also referred to as the internal camera, 
was not archived in space.  The video was instead recorded on the ground in the operations center.  
Its gain was sometimes adjusted for improved imaging of dim flames, e.g., approaching extinction.   
 
The sensitivity of the color digital camera, often referenced as the ACME DataCam (i.e., Data 
Camera), to the dim microgravity flames was such that it was often used with long exposure times 
and thus low framing rates, for example on the order of 1 frame per second.  But as an alternate, 
it was sometimes instead used with high gain values. 
 
The clear “filter” is of fused silica.  Unfortunately, the thickness of the blue-green BG7 Schott glass 
filter and the added antireflective (AR) coating caused too great a reduction in the red, so it does 
not balance the intensity of the three color planes as intended and thereby can limit the accuracy 
of temperature determination.  Meanwhile, rather than the 450-nm bandpass filter described 
above, the high-definition color camera was equipped with a bandpass filter for imaging 
formaldehyde emissions.   For more information, see the Data Camera Characterization Report 
(ACME-RPT-010 Rev. A). 
 
Pyrometry can alternately be accomplished with CIR’s monochrome High-Bit Depth Multispectral 
(HiBMs) camera, equipped with a Liquid-Crystal Tunable Filter (LCTF), which allows for imaging at 
multiple spectra, but requires a quasi-steady flame for measurement at each desired band.  This 
camera has a telecentric optical system and is recorded at 512x512 and 30 frames per second 
(fps).  Although it has a 1024x1024 pixel array, binning has been necessary because of signal loss 
through the LCTF.  Both soot pyrometry and Thin Filament Pyrometry (TFP) are possible, where 
ACME is equipped with a crew-replaceable array of 5 silicon carbide (SiC) fibers.  The fibers are 
orthogonal to the flame axis and the array can be translated along the flame axis to the desired 
position downstream of the burner, e.g., based on the downlink of the analog video.  During set 
up, the crew can manually orient the array so that it is orthogonal to either ACME’s color digital 
camera or the HiBMs camera with the LCTF.  An alternate fiber array including a platinum wire 
will be used for inflight characterization, which in combination with preflight calibration will 
enable determination of the soot volume fraction [24]. 
 

=== PAGE 13 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
13 
 
 
In contrast to the preceding paragraph, ACME did not use a HiBMs camera for pyrometry, but 
instead relied on use of ACME’s color DataCam for such temperature measurements.  For an 
example of how this can be done, see the techniques described in the following papers:   
P.B. Kuhn, B. Ma, B.C. Connelly, M.D. Smooke, and M.B. Long, “Soot and Thin-filament Pyrometry 
Using a Color Digital Camera,” Proceedings of the Combustion Institute, 33 (2011) 743-750.  
B. Ma, M. B. Long, “Absolute light calibration using S-type thermocouples,” Proceedings of the 
Combustion Institute, 34 (2) (2013) 3531-3539. 
 
TFP tests were conducted with 14-micron fibers spaced apart by 5 mm for a total span of 20 mm 
(in the case of 5 intact ceramic fibers), neglecting optional translation of the array.  Tests were 
conducted using arrays with and without the platinum wire in the furthest downstream position.  
Tests were also sometimes conducted with some of the fibers broken and subsequently removed, 
leaving only three fibers in the final testing for the BRE and Coflow Laminar Diffusion Flame (CLD 
Flame) experiments and for all CFI-G testing. 
 
CIR has a second HiBMs camera, without a filter, that will be used in combination with CIR’s 
illumination package for alternate measurements of the soot volume fraction.  This will be 
accomplished via an extinction technique previously employed in microgravity [3,6,26], where the 
camera and the collimated light source (with its two fiber-coupled laser diodes) are positioned at 
opposite windows.  The images are recorded at 1024x1024 and 30 fps.  Thus far, the primary 
purpose of this combined system has been the measurement of the droplet diameter for 
determination of the droplet burning rate. 
 
A HiBMs camera without the Liquid Crystal Tunable Filter (LCTF) was used throughout ACME’s 
operations.  In the first round of the CLD Flame experiment, it was used without a filter for flame 
imaging, but this proved to be largely unsuccessful because the camera is very insensitive to blue.  
Through the remainder of ACME testing, it was equipped with a red filter corresponding to the CIR 
illumination package for the rest of the ACME testing.  Unfortunately, that filter is sufficiently 
broad that significant incandescence can pass through the filter limiting its utility for 
determinations of soot volume fraction via light extinction, e.g., through the technique described 
in the following papers: 
D.L. Urban, Z.G. Yuan, P.B. Sunderland, K.C., Lin, Z. Dai, and G.M. Faeth, “Smoke-Point Properties 
of Nonbuoyant Round Laminar Jet Diffusion Flames,” Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth 
Symposium (International) on Combustion 28 (2000) 1965-1972.  
F.J. Diez, C. Aalburg, P.B. Sunderland, D.L. Urban, Z.-G. Yuan, G.M. Faeth, “Soot properties of 
laminar jet diffusion flames in microgravity,” Combustion and Flame, 156 (2009) 1514-1524.  
P.S. Greenberg and J.C. Ku, “Soot Volume Fraction Imaging,” Applied Optics, 36 (22) (1997) 5514-
5522. 
Nonetheless, soot volume fraction can also be determined from the color DataCam images. 
 
During ACME operations, the HiBMs camera was typically archived at 15 fps because of data limits 
for transfer and downlink operations.  And because operations were constrained by data limits, 
image data from this camera were sometimes deleted without downlinking to enable additional 
testing.  And in some testing, HiBMs images weren’t even acquired given their lesser value. 
 
Unfortunately, the HiBMs backlight illumination is significantly obstructed by the bracket for the 
electrode mesh further limiting its utility for the E-FIELD Flames experiment.   This was a design 

=== PAGE 14 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
14 
 
 
trade-off necessitated primarily by ACME’s large number of cameras and other optical 
instruments. 
 
CIR’s Low-Light-Level Ultraviolet (LLL-UV) package is a monochrome camera with an intensifier 
(for 280-700 nm) and a 310-nm bandpass filter (with a 10-nm FWHM) for OH* imaging.  Again as 
a result of the signal loss through the filter, binning is employed such that the OH* images are 
recorded at 512x512 and 30 fps. 
 
During ACME operations, the LLL-UV camera was only used for the Structure and Response of 
Spherical Diffusion Flames (s-Flame) experiment. 
 
While not discussed in the preceding section, another intensified camera was used throughout 
ACME testing, although its image data was sometimes deleted or not even acquired to allow the 
performance of additional tests.   This was the Cool Flames Investigation (CFI) camera which was 
generally configured with its CH* filter, where exceptions included CFI-G and s-Flame testing with 
particularly dim flames.  Due to design trade-offs, its Field of View (FOV) was partially obstructed 
by the arms of the Thin Filament Pyrometry (TFP) fiber array when it was moved inwards to the 
flame.  More information about the CFI intensified camera can be found in its characterization 
report, CIR-RPT-4600. 
 
The ACME chamber insert will also be equipped with non-imaging optical diagnostics including 
both thermopile radiometers and Photomultiplier Tubes (PMTs).  There is a crew-exchangeable 
linear array of radiometers of which there are two versions supporting the initial set of 
experiments.  The array has a fixed position which is parallel to the chamber axis and centered 
(along the chamber length) relative to the chamber windows and thus most of the other 
instrumentation.  One array is equipped with a single wide-view radiometer with two narrow-
view radiometers that are downstream and two more that are upstream, where all views are 
orthogonal to the chamber axis, as depicted in Figure 4.  The narrow-view radiometers are 
intended to support studies of gas-jet flames, where ACME can accommodate shorter burners, 
making the “lower” detectors useful.  The other array, also seen in Fig. 4, provides for three wide-
view measurements of the flame, where one view is masked to nominally block radiant emission 
from the burner.  It was specifically designed for the BRE experiment but will be a resource 
available to other ACME experiments.  Given that the radiometer array can be exchanged by the 
crew, alternate arrays could be developed.   
 

=== PAGE 15 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
15 
 
 
 
Figure 4: Crew-exchangeable radiometer arrays on the ACME chamber insert: (top) standard 
(ACME) array of 5 radiometers, and (bottom) array with three radiometers, designed for the BRE 
experiment, where the lowest detector is masked to avoid view of the burner. 
 
A third radiometer array was used in the CFI-G experiment and the second round of the Flame 
Design experiment, where it is important to understand that only a single radiometer array can be 
used at a time.  Unlike ACME’s other radiometer arrays, each sensor in the CFI-G array has two 
fixed gains, i.e., a high gain and low gain.  It is described in the Cool Flames Radiometer 
Characterization Report (CIR-RPT-4600). 
 
The narrow-view radiometers in the standard array are only fully sensitive in small spots, but they 
are each sensitive in a much greater Field of View (FOV) than represented in the preceding figure.   
They do not have lenses; their FOV is a result of an aperture where most of their FOV is within the 
penumbra which is only visible to a portion of the sensor.  Figures representing the measured FOVs 

=== PAGE 16 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
16 
 
 
of the as-built standard and BRE radiometer arrays are found in section 3.F of the ACME 
Engineering Implementation report.   
 
Unfortunately, the radiometers in the BRE array typically saturated in the first round of BRE 
testing, so the standard array was used in its second round.  However, those radiometers similarly 
saturated in many of round 2 tests.  In this regard, each of ACME’s BRE and standard radiometers 
have a fixed gain.  
 
Radiometers in the standard ACME array regrettably saturated in most of Flame Design’s first 
round of testing so it was replaced with the CFI-G array in the second round. 
 
For more information about the standard radiometer array used for most ACME testing, see the 
Radiometer Characterization Report (ACME-RPT-011).  Meanwhile, you can learn about the array 
used in the first round of BRE testing from the BRE Radiometer Characterization Report (ACME-
RPT-012).    
 
An additional wide-view radiometer, that is fixed and not crew exchangeable, is positioned 
downstream of the burner and flame at 30o from the chamber axis.  This detector is primarily 
intended to support the spherical flame experiments and will have a quicker response than the 
more sensitive detectors that will used in the linear arrays.   Like the radiometers on the two linear 
arrays, it will have a spectral range of nominally 0.2-11 micron and its field of view will be 
established by an appropriately selected aperture. 
 
The FOV of the off-set radiometer is also shown in section 3.F of the ACME Engineering 
Implementation report.  Learn more about this sensor from the Radiometer Characterization 
Report (ACME-RPT-011).   
 
To detect the quenching of dim flames, the chamber insert will be equipped with a set of three 
PMTs.  Each PMT will have a wide-angle view, a sight line that is orthogonal to the chamber axis, 
and will be centered (along the chamber length) relative to the chamber windows so that it is 
aligned with most of the other instrumentation.  The PMTs’ spectral range will be 230-700 nm, 
i.e., visible and near ultraviolet, but one will have a 310-nm bandpass filter and another will have 
a 430-nm bandpass filter (where both are with a 10-nm FWHM).  The pair of detectors will enable 
measurement of OH* and CH* emission, respectively.  The third PMT will be equipped with a 
neutral density filter to prevent saturation.  Like many other components, the PMT array can be 
removed from the chamber insert by the crew. 
 
Unlike the radiometers, each PMT had a readily adjustable gain.  However, the PMT signals 
sometimes saturated when the gains were set too high.  See the PMT Characterization Report 
(ACME-RPT-013) to learn more about the three Photomultiplier Tube (PMTs).   
 
The chamber insert is also equipped with six far-field thermocouples to measure the spread of 
the thermal field in the spherical flame experiments.  They are of limited utility for other 
experiments because they are positioned upstream of the burner tip.  Therefore, they will 
generally not be installed by the crew to reduce the chance of accidental damage.  There will be 
two versions of a four-thermocouple rake to allow a choice of near and far measurements.  Other 

=== PAGE 17 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
17 
 
 
arrays could be designed to support future experiments, but they cannot extend downstream of 
the burner tip without interfering with other (e.g., optical) measurements. 
 
The two lone thermocouples, which are both at nominally 200 mm from the center of the spherical 
burner, were installed throughout ACME testing.  The tip of one was seen to be slightly bent early 
in testing, as discussed and depicted in section 3.G of the ACME Engineering Implementation 
report.   
 
The short (or far) version of the thermocouple rake was used throughout ACME testing, except for 
the final day of CFI-G testing and first round-two day of Flame Design testing, which both featured 
normal flames, even though second rounds of each study were otherwise with inverse flames.   
Factors which led to the limited use of the short thermocouple rake included the need for crew 
time to switch between rakes and the potential adverse effects, such as heat loss and quenching, 
of the long (close) rake.  The short (far) rake’s thermocouple tips should nominally be at 45, 60, 
100, and 100 mm from the spherical burner center.  Meanwhile, the thermocouples of the long 
(near) rake should nominally be at 13, 25, 50, and 100 mm from the spherical burner center.  
 
For thermocouples at the same distance from the burner center, the angle between the rays from 
the burner center to the two thermocouples should be 90 degrees.  The bead size of the 
thermocouples was not measured, but it is undoubtedly at least twice the size of the 0.2 mm 
diameter wire. 
  
The two thermocouples closest to the burner outlets on each four-thermocouple rake are type B, 
while the others are type K. 
 
Experiment-unique hardware is also mounted on the chamber insert.  For example, to 
accommodate the E-FIELD Flames experiment, the insert is equipped with a high-voltage supply 
and a crew-removable electrode mesh which can be set between +10 and -10 kV.   The circular mesh 
is orthogonal to the chamber axis and is positioned (during set up) at either ~35 or ~50 mm 
downstream of the insulated burner.  The ion current between the burner and electrode mesh will 
be determined via measurement of the voltage drop across a known resistor and application of 
Ohm’s Law. 
 
Additional images of the chamber insert can be seen in the ACME Engineering Implementation 
report, where the hardware specific to E-FIELD Flames is discussed further in section 2.B of that 
report. 
 
Additional supporting measurements will be made, where the chamber pressure is a simple 
example.  The ACME experiments will use the CIR’s gas chromatograph for pre- and post-test 
analysis of the chamber atmosphere, e.g., for oxygen, nitrogen, carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide, 
and fuel gases.  Acceleration measurements will be provided by the Space Acceleration 
Measurement System (SAMS) [27], which is the primary instrument for such measurements on 
ISS and previously served that role for the space shuttle. 
 
The CIR’s Gas Chromatograph Instrumentation Package (GCIP) was not used for the CFI-G, CLD 
Flame, or E-FIELD Flames investigations but was sometimes used during BRE, Flame Design, and 
s-Flame testing.  Its use required significant time and as such effectively reduced the number of 

=== PAGE 18 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
18 
 
 
tests that could be conducted.  However, estimates of the chamber contents were computed 
assuming that the fuel in a normal flame test (for example) was either fully or not at all oxidized, 
e.g., for unsustained ignition in the latter case. 
 
The CIR facility was equipped with a 3-axis SAMS sensor head and the acceleration measurements, 
along with relevant documentation, are accessible via the home page for the Principal Investigator 
Microgravity Services (PIMS), https://gipoc.grc.nasa.gov/wp/pims/home/.  To be clear, the 
acceleration measurements are not archived with the ACME experiment data in the Physical 
Sciences Informatics (PSI) website, www.nasa.gov/PSI.  
 
All ACME experiments will be constant volume (i.e., rather than constant pressure) studies, where 
the chamber’s free volume will be about 90 liters.  Burner flows will generally be constrained to 
limit the pressure rise, and tests will typically be 0.5-2 minutes in duration. 
 
The chamber’s free volume is approximately 83 liters depending on the installed hardware. 
 
The ACME experiments will be configured, but not conducted, by the ISS crew.  Instead, the 
experiments will be commanded from the ground, specifically from the Telescience Support 
Center (TSC) at the NASA Glenn Research Center in Cleveland, Ohio.  They can be conducted in a 
nominally automated mode using pre-programmed scripts.  However, it will also be possible to 
effectively operate the experiments in a “manual” mode, where changes can be made in response 
to the analog video downlink and the numerical data available in the telemetry stream.  For 
example, a flow rate could be adjusted to approach a stability or soot limit.  Step and ramp 
changes can be made in the flow rate(s) or electric field potential.  The TFP fiber array can be 
translated uniformly through a soot-free flame to get a continuum measurement of the 
temperature field.  In summary, ACME’s experiment control will allow for broad flexibility.   
 
The TSC is now also referred to as the Glenn ISS Payload Operations Center (GIPOC).  ACME tests 
were always conducted in a nominally automated mode. 
 
B. Hardware Shortcomings 
From the Flame Design PI, Rich Axelbaum: 
“The only significant disappointment with the project was with the diagnostics, 
particularly with respect to gas temperature and soot volume fraction. They were not at 
the level that the team would have hoped.  Much of this was due to the fact that the 
diagnostics were outdated by the time they were used in our experiments on the ISS, and 
thus the diagnostics and calibrations were not at the level that we expect in a laboratory 
experiment.  Of course, the ISS has constraints that limit the ability to incorporate state-
of-the-art diagnostics, and this likely made this weakness unavoidable, but it would have 
been valuable to have had more flexibility in terms of being able to upgrade the 
diagnostics with more modern cameras and instrumentation.” 
 
ACME’s sintered spherical burners did not always yield spherically symmetric flames which are 
centered on the burner’s center, where that combination is important for true spherical 
symmetry.  While nominally spherical at moderate flow rates, the flame’s center became 
increasing offset from the burner center as the flow rate was increased.  It is very likely that the 
sintered attachment of the sphere to the supply tube is more porous than the sintered sphere 

=== PAGE 19 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
19 
 
 
itself because the flame is seen to be shifted toward the supply tube.  There was significant 
improvement when the starting burner (serial number 1002) was replaced mid-way through 
round 1 with an alternate burner (serial number 1003), which continued to be used for spherical 
flame testing throughout the remainder of ACME operations.  Nonetheless, the symmetry was 
not perfect, which is a shortcoming of the Flame Design data. 
 
On 27 Dec. 2021 (GMT 361), it was determined that the Thin Filament Pyrometry (TFP) fiber array 
was not aligned to the ACME Data Camera (DataCam) as intended, i.e., so that the fibers would 
be orthogonal relative to the camera.  Unfortunately, this was the fourth day of testing in which 
the fiber array wasn’t aligned, where it regrettably wasn’t recognized earlier.  Given the 
importance of the TFP-derived measurements of the flame temperature, testing was halted until 
the array was aligned (with other crew tasks) by astronaut Raja Chari on 17 Jan. 2022 (GMT 017).   
 
The signal from the standard ACME radiometer array used in round 1 of Flame Design testing was 
saturated for nearly every test, yielding non-useful data. For round 2, that sensor array was 
replaced with the one designed for Cool Flames Investigation with Gases (CFI-G) which yielded 
satisfactory measurements. 
 
ACME’s Mass Flow Controllers (MFCs) used to control the flow of fuel, nitrogen, and oxidizer did 
not always perform adequately, where the flow rates were not always appropriately steady or at 
the intended value.  However, the resulting effects on the flame behavior are tentatively assumed 
to be minor. 
 
In addition to sections 3.A-B, shortcomings are discussed in Appendices B and C of this report and 
in the ACME Engineering Implementation document.  The latter document includes discussion of 
deviations and waivers (in section 4.B), etc. 
 
 
4. Preliminary Results  
A. Changed Test Plans  
A change was made to the CIR combustion chamber’s pressure limit on 17 Jan. 2022 (by astronaut 
Raja Chari) to enable Flame Design testing at chamber pressures of up to 3 atm in the final round-
2 test days, whereas the limit had been 1.5 atm in preceding testing.  In his request for this change, 
Flame Design PI Rich Axelbaum explained: 
“One of the fundamental goals of Flame Design is to achieve sooting limits.  We are unsure 
if we will be able to attain a range of sooting flames with the current ambient fuel 
constraints.  One way to increase soot formation, and thus the range of the test matrix, 
is via higher pressures, so this capability can help to ensure we meet our science goals.  
Another fundamental goal of Flame Design is to understand flame extinction.  Our recent 
analysis suggests that pressure is a critical variable when predicting flame extinction, and 
in can influence flame chemistry in ways that we had not anticipated.  Obtaining 
extinction data over a wide range of pressures could also be valuable for spacecraft fire 
safety.”  
 
An additional normal-flames test day was added to the start of the second round of testing (even 
though that was focused on inverse flames) to acquire data useful for calibrating the Thin Filament 
Pyrometry (TFP) measurements.  With that goal, the added test day, conducted on 28 Oct. 2021 

=== PAGE 20 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
20 
 
 
(GMT 301), was carried out with the long (near) thermocouple rake, where all other Flame Design 
tests were conducted with the short (far) rake.  In his request for this additional test day, the PI 
stated in part: 
“The ability to validate the TFP is very important for most of the ACME experiments.  Thus, 
measuring the near-field temperatures under conditions where we have TFP data would 
be highly desirable, almost required.  … These results would be the only measurements 
ACME has with a direct comparison with TFP, and since we already know exactly which 
flames to run to get good data, we know that we will be successful in obtaining this data 
and validating the TFP data.  … Reiterating, this extra day would directly benefit all of the 
temperature data of Flame Design, and all of the spherical flame ACME experiments, by 
providing at least one direct validation of the TFP method.  As you know, we have 
uncertainties about the accuracy of the TFP technique we are using in the ACME rig, and 
having these T/C measurements could have a profound impact on the ACME results.” 
 
As discussed in the previous section, the decision was made to use the CFI-G radiometer array in 
Flame Design’s second round of testing rather than the standard ACME array that often saturated 
in the earlier testing. 
 
Coiled igniter tips were also used in the second round of testing instead of the loop igniter tips 
used in the first round, where the coiled were believed to be more robust. 
 
Other changes to the test plans were minor in comparison. 
 
B. Overview of Experiment Test Operations 
While not yet prepared, additional details will be made available in the ACME/Flame Design 
Experimental Procedure document. 
 
The narrative description of the experimental procedure is an excerpt from the ‘Methods / 
Experimental’ section of the following conference paper. 
Y.-C. Chien, J. Tinajero, D. Stocker, U. Hegde, and D. Dunn-Rankin, “Electric Field Effects on 
Flames in Microgravity on the International Space Station,” 2018 Spring Technical Meeting of 
the Central States Section of The Combustion Institute, Minneapolis, MN, 20-22 May 2018. 
 
While the paper was written for the Electric-Field Effects on Laminar Diffusion Flames (E-FIELD 
Flames) experiment, much of the discussion applies to ACME in general, including the Flame 
Design investigation.  The figure referenced in this excerpt is not included herein.  Clarifications 
and additional information, not in the conference paper, are included in boxed notes like this. 
 
The CIR experiments are configured, but not conducted, by the ISS crew.  Thus far, ACME’s activity 
has included the majority of the crew members, regardless of their nationalities.  Most often the 
astronauts and cosmonauts exchange gas bottles, mass flow controllers, and igniter tips.  In the 
latter case, the igniter tip exchange can occur after failure or proactively before failure when the 
crew already has changes to make changes in the interior of the insert.  While these activities may 
seem mundane, the crew play a critical role in setting up the hardware for each experiment.  As 
an extreme example, there were crew activities on 8 separate days in Sept.-Oct. 2017 to configure 
the CIR and ACME hardware for the first ACME experiment, namely the Coflow Laminar Diffusion 
Flame (CLD Flame) experiment.  In contrast, only two crew days were required to reconfigure the 

=== PAGE 21 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
21 
 
 
hardware for the first E-FIELD Flames tests because of the initial use of the same coflow burner.  
Planning is critical because crew activity is scheduled three weeks in advance, for which detailed 
procedures must be prepared and uplinked to the ISS. 
 
As a correction, including two maintenance activities, there were 11 crew days in Sept.-Oct. 2017 
to prepare for the initial CLD Flame testing on the space station. 
 
All CIR tests are remotely commanded from the ground from NASA’s Glenn ISS Payload Operations 
Center (GIPOC) in Cleveland, Ohio.  Typically, four to six people staff four consoles during the 
testing.  The CIR hardware is controlled from the Rack Officer (RO) and Data Management Officer 
(DMO) consoles, and the ACME hardware is controlled from the Payload Developer (PD) console.  
Two shifts of personnel are scheduled to staff these three consoles on test days because they 
typically last 14 hours with the many pre- and post-testing activities.  Given that the tests are 
remotely commanded, the operations are carried out in the day and evening in Cleveland, e.g., 
from 7 AM to 9 PM.  A day’s tests, i.e., with flames, are normally conducted in a period of 10 hours 
of less.  Tests are normally conducted on three weekdays per two weeks.  On intervening 
weekdays, the image data is downlinked and the crew often swap one or both gas bottles.  
Transferring and downlinking data from a day’s tests also requires a 2-shift day for the RO and 
DMO consoles, where it is always necessary to verify that data was downlinked without errors 
and that data is not missing.  Those two positions are also staffed to guide and oversee the crew 
activity.  As a result, the CIR consoles are normally actively staffed on four weekdays per week.  A 
team of four carry out the detailed planning for the CIR and ACME console staff, and the daily 
operational plans typically exceed 50 pages on days including testing. 
 
The science console allows for review of the analog video and non-imaging telemetry (at 1 Hz) in 
near real time but doesn’t allow for commanding.  In the case of E-FIELD Flames, arrangements 
were made so that the analog video is streamed to a secure computer at UC Irvine to allow the 
research team to participate in test operations and to recommend adjustments to the day’s 
planned parameters.  That team does not see the telemetry during the testing, but is in 
communication via phone and e-mail with their NASA research partners at the GRC ISS Payload 
Operations Center (GIPOC).  While there are many preparatory steps, the tests are ultimately 
conducted using an uploaded software script and parameter files.  In advance of the test day, the 
UC Irvine science team plans the nearly 60 parameters in the voltage sweep script and specifies 
other parameters that are configured outside of the script, such as camera settings.  It is also 
possible to effectively conduct tests in a ‘manual’ mode, where parameters are changed in 
response to the analog video downlink or telemetry.  For example, the electric field potential can 
be adjusted to approach a stability or soot limit. 
 
Provisions were made to enable the investigators from all ACME experiments to remotely view the 
analog video while they communicated verbally with NASA science personnel in the operations 
center.  All ACME flame tests, including those for Flame Design, were conducted in a nominally 
automated manner using software scripts and extensive parameter files. 
 
Typically, ten E-FIELD Flames tests are conducted per test day. Despite the short test durations, 
the low rate results from several unavoidable factors.  After a test is conducted, the 125-Hz non-
imaging data is downlinked for immediate review by the science team.  A small sample of images 
are often downlinked to ensure that the camera exposures are appropriate, where the times for 

=== PAGE 22 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
22 
 
 
those images are typically selected based on non-imaging data to provide extreme examples.  The 
review helps to verify parameters or plan for adjustments in subsequent tests, e.g., to select the 
voltage range after determining where the ion current saturates for the given flame conditions.  
After a test is conducted, a fan circulates the chamber atmosphere after which the chamber is 
vented (to space) back to atmospheric pressure, if needed.  Midway through a day’s E-FIELD 
Flames tests, the atmosphere is circulated for 15 minutes through a filter cartridge filled with 
molecular sieves to capture any soot and adsorb at least a portion of the combustion products, 
e.g., carbon dioxide, water vapor, and incomplete combustion products.  The tests are only 
conducted when both Ku and S band communication is available through NASA’s Tracking and 
Data Relay Satellite (TDRS) System.  Depending on the various orbits, there are periodic 
communication outages with a loss of signal (LOS) that can be a short handover (from one satellite 
to another) or can last as long as 30 minutes. 
 
An average of 16 tests were conducted per Flame Design test day, where ignition was typically 
unsuccessful (e.g., un-sustained) in a couple of tests. 
 
In contrast to E-FIELD Flames, recirculation during Flame Design inverse-flame test operations was 
only conducted prior to venting at the end of a test day.  During normal-flame testing, it was 
usually conducted once in the midst of testing, as done with E-FIELD Flames.  Exceptions were test 
days 19115, 19123, and 19137 (the first three days with flames); 19161 (when no flames were 
ignited); 19206 (the last test day in the first round of testing), and 21301 (the first day of the second 
round of testing).  Another exception was on 19150 when it was carried out during the midst of 
testing and then again when the combustion chamber was vented and refilled for additional tests 
on the same day. 
 
A variety of constraints limit the number of tests that can be performed, both overall and on a 
daily basis.  The next combustion experiments in the CIR will feature solid fuels and focus on flame 
spread and material flammability.  That follow-on plan limits the duration of ACME operations, 
where each ACME experiment is allotted four months for testing.  Although it requires additional 
crew time, these allotments are split into two rounds so that the investigators have a break from 
testing for careful review of the early results so that they can maximize the scientific outcome of 
their second round.  This paper reports on early results from the first round of E-FIELD Flames. 
 
While nitrogen is available from the space station, the combustion testing is limited by the 
available gas bottles that were and are launched to support the tests.  For E-FIELD Flames and 
most of ACME’s experiments, the test matrices used to plan those gas resources were established 
in 2010.  At that time, NASA limited the scope of the ACME tests matrices with the intent of 
focused experiments with limited objectives rather than comprehensive experiments.  As such, 
the general target was 50 tests per experiment.  For most ACME experiments, the limiting gas 
constraint is the oxygen/nitrogen bottles used to fill the chamber.  This resource constraint is 
exacerbated by the CIR because it is equipped with a pair of redundant safety timers to limit the 
fuel that can flow into the combustion chamber (where the timers can be set for the oxidizer flow 
in the case of inverse flame testing).  The timers can only be reset by venting the combustion 
chamber.  Therefore, the timer limit combined with other constraints effectively corresponds to 
the day’s maximum flow time for the fuel (or more generally, the limiting reactant).  For E-FIELD 
Flames, the safety timers are set to the maximum value of 999 seconds, which corresponds to the 
10 tests typically completed per day. 

=== PAGE 23 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
23 
 
 
 
The maximum limit of 999 seconds for the valve safety timers was used for all ACME testing. 
 
Another constraint is the available time in a day, where the console personnel and ISS resources, 
such as the video downlink, are planned for a limited number of hours.  When necessary for the 
research, NASA does have continuous 24-hour/day operations for some non-CIR experiments.  
But as discussed, the ACME tests are typically two minutes or less in duration, so the testing is 
almost always limited to the planned durations. 
 
Data limits are yet another constraint, where the on-orbit hardware can store a limited amount 
of data.  More importantly, 127,000 MB is the most that can be reasonably managed in a two-
shift transfer and downlink day.  Therefore, tests days are limited to this amount of data, where 
image data from select cameras is often archived at reduced rates to mitigate this challenge.  
Nonetheless, the limit sometimes forces decisions to abandon recorded images. 
 
This detailed description of operations and hardware provides the context under which the ACME 
experiments are conducted.  … 
 
Table 1 is a summary log of the flames ignited for Flame Design during the two rounds of testing, 
including a limited overview of the test conditions.  They were copied from this report’s Appendix 
C. 30-Day Operational Accomplishments Report for ISS Increment 66 which comprehensively 
reflects all Flame Design testing on the ISS.  
 
 

=== PAGE 24 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
24 
 
 
Table 1. 
Flame Design log of flames ignited in Increments 59/60 and 66 
 
Test 
day1 
Year Month Date 
Spherical 
burner2 
Burner 
reactant 
bottle 
Atmosphere 
concentration3 
Flames 
ignited4 
First round of tests, featuring normal flames, in April to July 2019 
19115 
2019 
4 
25 
serial 
number 
1002 
100% 
C2H4 
21% O2 
11 
19123 
5 
3 
21% O2 
19 
19137 
17 
21% O2 
20 
19142 
22 
40% O2 
8 
19150 
30 
30%, 40% O2 
15 
19156 
6 
5 
40% O2 
13 
19161 
10 
40% O2 
0 
19171 
20 
serial 
number 
1003 
40% O2 
12 
19175 
24 
40% O2 
14 
19182 
7 
1 
40% O2 
15 
19189 
8 
40% O2 
15 
19196 
15 
40% O2 
13 
19200 
19 
30%, 40% O2 
12 
19206 
25 
21% O2 
21 
Second round of tests, mostly featuring inverse flames, in Oct. 2021 to Feb. 2022 
21301 
2021 
10 
28 
serial 
number 
1003 
100% 
C3H8 
40% O2 
18 
21328 
11 
24 
85% O2 
27%, 8% C2H4  
9 
21340 
12 
6 
17%, 12% C2H4 
13 
21349 
15 
65%, 27.5% 
C2H4 
15 
21361 
27 
20% C2H4 
20 
22018 
2022 
1 
18 
17%, 10% C2H4 
12 
22024 
24 
19% C2H4 
20 
22027 
27 
10% C2H4 
16 
22035 
2 
4 
17%, 10% C2H4 
15 
1Test day includes the year as the first two digits followed by the 3-digit day of the year. 
2Spherical burner refers to the specific 0.25-inch diameter spherical burner used in the 
tests.  The porous sintered burners varied in quality, where this was especially evident 
at high burner flow rates. 
3Atmosphere concentration (as diluted with nitrogen on a volume basis) was varied 
between tests, where approximate concentrations - neglecting the vitiation from 
preceding tests - are listed for the tests that ignited.    The chamber pressure was also 
sometime varied but that secondary parameter is not included in this summary table. 
4Flames ignited is the number ignited on that day (neglecting the day change on ISS). 
 
 

=== PAGE 25 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
25 
 
 
C. Summary of Preliminary Results  
Abstract for Critical temperature and reactant mass flux for radiative extinction of ethylene 
microgravity spherical diffusion flames at 1 bar (2023): 
In microgravity combustion, where buoyancy is not present to accelerate the flow field and strain 
the flame, radiative extinction is of fundamental importance, and has implications for spacecraft 
fire safety. In this work, the critical point for radiative extinction is identified for normal and 
inverse ethylene spherical diffusion flames via atmospheric pressure experiments conducted 
aboard the International Space Station, as well as with a transient numerical model. The fuel is 
ethylene with nitrogen diluent, and the oxidizer is an oxygen/nitrogen mixture. The burner is a 
porous stainless-steel sphere. All experiments are conducted at constant reactant flow rate. For 
normal flames, the ambient oxygen mole fraction was varied from 0.2 to 0.38, burner supply fuel 
mole fraction from 0.13 to 1, total mass flow rate, mtotal , from 0.6 to 12.2 mg/s, and adiabatic 
flame temperature, Tad , from 2000 to 2800 K. For inverse flames, the ambient fuel mole fraction 
was varied from 0.08 to 0.12, burner supply oxygen mole fraction from 0.4 to 0.85, mtotal from 
2.3 to 11.3 mg/s, and Tad from 2080 to 2590 K. Despite this broad range of conditions, all flames 
extinguish at a critical extinction temperature of 1130 K, and a fuel-based mass flux of 0.2 g/m2 -
s for normal flames, and an oxygen- based mass flux of 0.68 g/m2-s for inverse flames. With this 
information, a simple equation is developed to estimate the flame size (i.e., location of peak 
temperature) at extinction for any atmospheric-pressure ethylene spherical diffusion flame given 
only the reactant mass flow rate. Flame growth, which ultimately leads to radiative extinction if 
the critical extinction point is reached, is attributed to the natural development of the diffusion-
limited system as it approaches steady state and the reduction in the transport properties as the 
flame temperature drops due to increasing flame radiation with time (radiation-induced growth.) 
 
Abstract for On the existence of steady state gaseous microgravity spherical diffusion flames in 
the presence of radiation heat loss (2023): 
Whether steady-state gaseous microgravity spherical diffusion exist in the presence of radiation 
heat loss is an important fundamental question and has important implications for spacecraft fire 
safety. In this work, experiments aboard the International Space Station and a transient numerical 
model are used to investigate the existence of steady-state microgravity spherical diffusion 
flames. Gaseous spherical diffusion flames stabilized on a porous spherical burner are employed 
in normal (i.e., fuel flowing into an ambient oxidizer) and inverse (i.e., oxidizer flowing into an 
ambient fuel) flame configurations. The fuel is ethylene and the oxidizer oxygen, both diluted with 
nitrogen. The flow rate of the reactant gas from the burner is held constant. It is found that steady-
state gaseous microgravity spherical diffusion flames can exist in the presence of radiation heat 
loss, provided that the steady-state flame size is less than the flame size for radiative extinction, 
and the flame develops fast enough that radiation heat loss does not drop the flame temperature 
below the critical temperature for radiative extinction (1130 K). A simple model is provided that 
allows for the identification of initial conditions that can lead to steady-state spherical diffusion 
flames. In the spherical, infinite domain configuration, the characteristic time for the diffusion-
controlled system to effectively reach steady-state is found to be on the order of 100,000 s. 
Despite a narrow range of attainable conditions, flames that exhibit steady-state behavior are 
observed aboard the ISS for up to 870 s, even with the constraint of a finite boundary. Steady-
state flames are simulated using the numerical model for over 100,000 s. 
 

=== PAGE 26 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
26 
 
 
Abstract for Observations of long duration microgravity spherical diffusion flames aboard the 
international space station (2021): 
Spherical diffusion flames of gaseous fuels supported on a porous spherical burner are 
investigated experimentally in microgravity for long durations aboard the International Space 
Station (ISS). Experimental results are compared with a transient numerical model. The 
experiments involve normal spherical diffusion flames (i.e., fuel flowing into oxidizer) burning 
ethylene in an oxygen/nitrogen mixture at atmospheric pressure. The stoichiometric mixture 
fraction and adiabatic flame temperature are varied by diluting the fuel with nitrogen and varying 
the oxygen concentration in the ambient. The diagnostics consist of color video, thin-filament 
pyrometry for gas temperature, thermocouple measurements of burner temperature, and 
photomultiplier tube measurements of broad and narrow-band flame emission. Burn times range 
from 28 –336 s. All flames grow monotonically after ignition. Peak gas temperature generally 
decreases with time. Radiative extinction is observed when, at constant reactant flow rate, the 
flame expands until radiation heat loss approaches the chemical heat release. Before a flame 
experiences complete extinction, it may enter an oscillatory mode in which part of the flame 
partially extinguishes and then reforms. The oscillations grow in magnitude until complete 
extinction. Sufficiently small flames with low radiation losses exhibit quasi-steady behavior, but 
burner heating is significant, and the experimental duration is dictated by the temperature limit 
of the porous sphere. 
 
Publications: 
• 
P.H. Irace, K.A. Waddell, Denis Constales., P.B. Sunderland, R.L. Axelbaum, Critical 
temperature and reactant mass flux for radiative extinction of ethylene microgravity 
spherical diffusion flames at 1 bar, Proceedings of the Combustion Institute, in press 
(2023). 
• 
P.H. Irace, K Waddell, D. Constales, G. Yablonsky, M. Kim, P.B. Sunderland, R.L. Axelbaum, 
On the existence of steady state gaseous microgravity spherical diffusion flames in the 
presence of radiation heat loss, Proc. Combust. Inst., in press (2023). 
• 
P.H. Irace, H. Lee, K. Waddell, L. Tan, D.P. Stocker, P.B. Sunderland, R.L. Axelbaum, 
Observations of Long Duration Microgravity Spherical Diffusion Flames Aboard the 
International Space Station, Combustion and Flame, 229 (2021) 111373, 1-9. 
 
D. Surprises and New Discoveries  
• 
All the ISS flames observed by this project extinguish at a critical extinction temperature 
of 1130 K, and at a fuel mass flux of 0.2 g/m2-s for normal flames, and at an oxygen mass 
flux of 0.68 g/m2-s for inverse flames. 
• 
Microgravity diffusion flame growth, which ultimately leads to radiative extinction if the 
critical extinction point is reached, is attributed to the natural development of the 
diffusion-limited system as it approaches steady state and the reduction in the transport 
properties as the flame temperature drops due to increasing flame radiation with time 
(radiation-induced growth). 
• 
Steady-state gaseous microgravity spherical diffusion flames can exist in the presence of 
radiation heat loss, provided that the steady-state flame size is less than the flame size 
for radiative extinction, and the flame develops fast enough that radiation heat loss does 
not drop the flame temperature below the critical temperature for radiative extinction 
(1130 K). 

=== PAGE 27 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
27 
 
 
• 
In the spherical, infinite domain configuration, the characteristic time for the diffusion-
controlled system to effectively reach steady-state is found to be on the order of 105 s.  
• 
Radiative extinction is observed when, at constant reactant flow rate, a flame expands 
until radiation heat loss approaches the chemical heat release. Before a flame 
experiences complete extinction, it may enter an oscillatory mode in which part of the 
flame partially extinguishes and then reforms. The oscillations grow in magnitude until 
complete extinction. 
 
E. Accomplishment of Approved Objectives  
All the approved objectives, i.e., not designated as desired or highly desired in Section 2.C, were 
accomplished. 
 
F. Additional Objectives Achieved 
See 4.D, Surprises and New Discoveries, above. 
 
G. Impacts, Benefits, and Products 
The overwhelming majority of practical combustion processes involve non-premixed combustion 
of hydrocarbons. These processes must be efficient and the resulting emissions low. For example, 
soot production, which can adversely affect efficiency, emissions, and equipment lifetime, must 
be controlled, and flame extinction must be avoided. Many methods have been considered to 
reduce soot, such as increasing strain rates and inert concentrations and reducing pressures, but 
these techniques generally weaken the flame, leading to extinction and resulting in substantial 
performance penalties. The proposed study considers a novel method of approaching combustion 
to address these concerns. The approach is termed “Flame Design” as it attempts to take our 
fundamental understanding of diffusion flames and, within the inherent constraints imposed on 
the problem, design flames that best optimize efficiency and minimize pollutants. 
 
H. Patents 
No patents have been filed from this research. 
 
 
5. Follow-On Experiments 
The range of available experimental conditions was limited, including the fuel and oxygen concentrations 
and the ambient pressure.  In particular, for safety reasons, the O2 mole fraction limit for normal tests was 
40% and the C2H4 mole fraction limit for inverse flames was 65%.  Tests with CH4 as fuel and CO2 as diluent, 
were slated for the test matrix by the investigators, but not allowed.  Finally, co-flow burner tests at the 
conditions considered by this project could be especially valuable. 
  
 

=== PAGE 28 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
28 
 
 
Appendix A. Abbreviations and Acronyms 
 
##### 
ACME days are identified by year (2 digits) and the day of the year (3 digits, 001-366) 
 
#####x# 
ACME tests are identified by day (5 digits; see above), a letter, and a 1-digit number 
 
0-g 
microgravity 
 
1-g 
normal gravity (on the surface of the Earth) 
ACME 
Advanced Combustion via Microgravity Experiments (CIR project) 
ADP 
Acceptance Data Package 
ASGSR 
American Society for Gravitational and Space Research 
AVP 
avionics package 
BRE 
Burning Rate Emulator (an ACME experiment) 
C2H4 
ethylene 
C3H8 
propane 
CH2O 
formaldehyde 
CASIS 
Center for the Advancement of Science in Space  
CCD 
Charge-Coupled Device (such as a camera sensor) 
CFI 
Cool Flames Investigation (an MDCA experiment preceding ACME in the CIR) 
CFI-G 
Cool Flames Investigation with Gases (an ACME experiment) 
CH4 
methane 
CIA 
Chamber Insert Assembly (inserted into the CIR combustion chamber) 
CIR 
Combustion Integrated Rack (ISS facility in which ACME experiments are conducted) 
CLD Flame 
Coflow Laminar Diffusion Flame (an ACME experiments) 
CM 
Combustion Module (space shuttle precursor to the CIR) 
cm 
centimeter 
CO2 
carn dioxide 
Co-I 
Co-Investigator 
CRS 
Commercial Resupply Service (a designation of ISS cargo missions) 
CSA 
Canadian Space Agency 
CSV 
comma-separated values 
CWRU 
Case Western Reserve University 
Da 
Damköhler number 
DataCam 
Data Camera (ACME’s primary camera which was characterized for pyrometry, etc.) 
E-FIELD Flames Electric-Field Effects on Laminar Diffusion Flames (an ACME experiment) 
EMI 
electromagnetic interference 
EMS 
Experiment Mounting Structure 
ERD 
Engineering Requirements Document 
ESA 
European Space Agency 
Fiji 
Fiji Is Just ImageJ (a version of ImageJ preloaded with many plug-in features) 
Flame Design 
Flame Design (an ACME experiment) 
FOMA 
Fuel and Oxidizer Management Assembly (CIR’s gas management subsystem) 
FOV 
field of view 
fps 
frames per second 
GC 
Gas Chromatograph (see GCIP) 
GCIP 
Gas Chromatograph Instrumentation Package (for measuring CIR chamber contents) 
GigE 
Gigabit Ethernet (an interface standard for high performance cameras) 
GIPOC 
Glenn ISS Payload Operations Center (also known as the TSC) 
GMT 
Greenwich Mean Time (where most references in this report are the day) 
H2 
hydrogen 

=== PAGE 29 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
29 
 
 
HiBMs 
High Bit-depth Multi-spectral camera (developed for the CIR facility) 
HOBJ 
Halcon object (binary uncompressed format; used by the ACME Data Camera)  
HV 
high voltage 
HVPS 
High-Voltage Power Supply 
ICDERS 
International Colloquium on the Dynamics of Explosions and Reactive Systems  
ID 
inner diameter (e.g., of burner tube) 
ImageJ 
Image Processing and Analysis in Java (open-source image processing software)  
IPSU 
Image Processing and Storage Unit (CIR device for recording images on ISS) 
IPSU-G  
IPSU for GigE cameras (including the DataCam and CFI intensified camera) 
ISRD 
Integrated Science Requirements Document (for a set of experiments) 
ISS 
International Space Station 
JAXA 
Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency 
kPa 
kilopascal 
kV 
kilovolt 
LLL-UV 
Low Light Level Ultraviolet camera ((developed for the CIR facility) 
LSP 
Laminar Soot Processes (a shuttle study conducted in the Combustion Module) 
MDCA 
Multi-user Droplet Combustion Apparatus (a CIR chamber insert) 
MFC 
Mass Flow Controller 
Mist 
Water-Mist Fire Suppression Experiment (a Combustion Module experiment) 
MIUL 
Materials Identification/Usage List 
mm 
millimeter 
MSG 
Microgravity Science Glovebox (ISS facility in which SLICE was conducted) 
N2 
nitrogen 
NSF 
National Science Foundation 
NTSC 
National Television System Committee 
O2 
oxygen 
OMA2 
Optical Multi-channel Analyzer 2 (open-source software for image processing) 
ops 
operations 
PARIS 
Passive Rack Isolation System (with which the CIR is equipped, but not used for ACME) 
PI 
Principal Investigator 
PIMS 
Principal Investigator Microgravity Services 
PMT 
Photomultiplier Tube (where ACME is equipped with three PMT modules) 
PS 
Project Scientist 
PSI 
Physical Science Informatics System 
psia 
pounds per square inch 
PT 
pressure transducer 
QD 
quick disconnect 
qty 
quantity 
RSA 
Russian Space Agency, i.e., Roscosmos 
s 
second 
SAMS 
Space Acceleration Measurement System 
SDP 
Safety Data Package 
s-Flame 
Structure and Response of Spherical Diffusion Flames (an ACME experiment) 
SiC 
Silicon Carbide (material of the TFP fibers)  
SLICE 
Structure & Liftoff In Combustion Experiment (CLD Flame precursor) 
slpm 
standard liters per minute (a measure of the mass or molar flow rate of a gas) 
SOFBALL  
Structure Of Flame Balls At Low Lewis-number (a Combustion Module study) 

=== PAGE 30 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
30 
 
 
SoFIE 
Solid Fuel Ignition and Extinction (project to follow ACME in the CIR facility) 
SORD 
Science Operations Requirements Document (an ACME supplement to the ISRD) 
SRD 
Science Requirements Document 
T/C (or t/c) 
Thermocouple 
TDRS 
Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (System) 
TFP 
Thin Filament Pyrometry (a method for gas-phase temperature measurements) 
TIFF or TIF 
Tagged Image File Format (e.g., for the CFI intensified, HiBMs, and LLL-UV cameras) 
TM 
thermistor 
TS 
Transport Stream (a video format) 
TSC 
Telescience Support Center (also known as the GIPOC) 
UV 
ultraviolet 
Ze 
Zeldovich number 
zero-g 
zero gravity, i.e., microgravity 
ZIN 
ZIN Technologies, Inc. (ACME engineering and operations provider) 
µA 
microamp 
 
While this list of abbreviations and acronyms is long, it is not comprehensive.  Contact ACME Project 
Scientist Dennis Stocker (216-433-2166, dennis.p.stocker@nasa.gov) for additional clarification. 
 
 
 

=== PAGE 31 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
31 
 
 
Appendix B. 30-Day Operational Accomplishments Report for ISS 
Increments 59 and 60 
17 December 2019 
30-day Operational Accomplishments Report  
… for the International Space Station (ISS) Increments 59 and 60 
 
ACME 
Advanced Combustion via Microgravity Experiments 
Flame Design 
 
Flame Design is one of several independent experiments that are part of the ACME project, which 
uses a single modular set of hardware to carry out studies of flames burning gaseous fuels in the 
ISS’ Combustion Integrated Rack (CIR).  The investigation will be carried out in two rounds of tests, 
where the first occurred in Increments 59 and 60.  It is currently expected that the second round 
of tests will be conducted during Increment 63. 
 
Prepared by the PI team and Dennis Stocker (dennis.p.stocker@nasa.gov), the ACME Project 
Scientist, who is the primary contact for E-FIELD Flames and ACME information. 
 
 
 
Principal Investigator (PI): 
Prof. Richard L. Axelbaum, Washington University in St. Louis, MO 
Co-Investigator (Co-I): 
Prof. Peter B. Sunderland, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 
Co-Investigator (Co-I): 
Dr. David L. Urban, NASA Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, OH 
Lead collaborator: 
Dr. Sergei Frolov, N.N. Semenov Institute of Chemical Physics, 
Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russia 
NASA Project Scientist (PS): Dennis P. Stocker, NASA Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, OH 
PS team members: 
Dr. Uday G. Hegde, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, 
OH 
 
Dr. Vedha Nayagam, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, 
OH 
 
 
 
I.  Introduction 
The Flame Design experiment is conducted in the Combustion Integrated Rack (CIR) on the 
International Space Station, as part of the Advanced Combustion via Microgravity Experiments 
(ACME) project.  The primary goal of the Flame Design experiment is to improve the 
understanding of soot inception and control, in order to enable the optimization of oxygen 
enriched combustion and the ‘design’ of non-premixed flames that are both robust and soot free.  
An outside review panel declared that Flame Design “… could lead to greatly improved burner 
designs that are efficient and less polluting than current designs."   
 

=== PAGE 32 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
32 
 
 
Flame Design investigates the soot inception and extinction limits of spherical microgravity 
flames created with porous spherical burners.  Tests are conducted with various concentrations 
of both the fuel (e.g., ethylene) and oxygen in order to determine the role of the flame structure 
on the soot inception. 
 
More specifically, Flame Design has the following experimental objectives which are listed here 
in priority order.  It must be emphasized that NASA does not currently plan to carry out the 
desired or highly desired testing with carbon dioxide, pressure as a variable (except to a limited 
degree), coflow flames, or methane. 
A. Obtain soot-inception limits of quasi-steady normal and inverse spherical diffusion flames 
as functions of flow rate, Zst, amount of inert (N2 or CO2**), and pressure** for C2H4 
and CH4* flames.  Identify the corresponding temperatures in hot regions.  Obtain similar 
limits and temperatures for inverse and normal coflow flames**. 
B. Obtain detailed measurements in quasi-steady normal and inverse spherical diffusion 
flames for C2H4 and CH4*.  Determine the effects of flow rate, Zst, amount of inert (N2 
or CO2**), and pressure** on flame temperature, size, color, and soot volume fraction.  
Evaluate the possible existence of steady flames. Obtain similar measurements for inverse 
and normal coflow flames**. 
C. Obtain extinction limits as functions of Zst, amount of inert (N2 or CO2**), and pressure** 
for normal and inverse spherical C2H4 and CH4 * flames.  Identify the corresponding 
temperatures in hot regions. Identify the presence of radiative or kinetic extinction.  
Evaluate whether pseudo-flammability limits can be obtained for these flames.  Measure 
blowoff limits for inverse and normal coflow flames**. 
*desired; **highly desired 
 
The majority of practical combustion processes involve the non-premixed combustion of 
hydrocarbons.  These processes must be efficient, and the resulting emissions must be low.  For 
example, soot production, which can adversely affect efficiency, emissions, and equipment 
lifetime, must be controlled, and flame extinction must be avoided.  Many methods have been 
considered to reduce soot, such as increasing inert concentrations and reducing pressures, but 
these techniques generally weaken flames, leading to performance penalties and possible 
extinction. 
 
The Flame Design study considers an innovative method of approaching combustion to address 
these concerns. The approach is termed flame design, as it takes a fundamental understanding 
of diffusion flames and, within the inherent constraints imposed, designs flames that best 
optimize efficiency and minimize pollutants. 
 
Flame design involves affecting the basic structure of the flame, in that the relationship between 
the temperature and concentration fields is varied to accomplish the desired objective.  This 
method involves shifting the nitrogen from the air (or oxygen/nitrogen mixture) to the fuel 
stream, such that the mixing that occurs at the flame can be varied with or without affecting the 
flame temperature.  [This can also be done with inerts other than nitrogen and oxygen/inert 

=== PAGE 33 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
33 
 
 
mixtures other than air.]  Such nitrogen exchange has enabled the production of the flames that 
are soot-free at all flow conditions, i.e., which are ‘permanently blue.’ 
 
The Flame Design experiment involves gaseous hydrocarbon diffusion flames supported on a 
porous spherical burner.  Soot inception limits and flame extinction limits are obtained as 
functions of the nitrogen exchange, flow direction, and pressure.  Extensive analytical and 
computational modeling support the experimental investigation, where they are facilitated by 
the spherical flame shape enabled by the microgravity environment.  Models include gas-phase 
and burner-surface radiation. 
 
Buoyant gravity-driven flow complicates the interpretation of the existing results and has led to 
different theories to explain the permanently-blue diffusion flames.  It is not known whether this 
phenomenon is due more to a change in the direction of convection across the flame, or to a 
change in the detailed structure of the flame. 
 
The challenges of normal-gravity studies are avoided by performing the tests on the International 
Space Station (ISS), where the non-buoyant microgravity flames allow the effects of convection 
direction and flame structure to be independently varied.  By ejecting fuel from the burner into 
an oxidizer (e.g., air) in a buoyancy free system, the convective flow across the flame is 
unambiguously from fuel to oxidizer. Alternatively, by ejecting oxidizer from the burner into an 
atmosphere of fuel, the flow is from oxidizer to fuel. 
 
Furthermore, microgravity studies of flames allow for a range of simplifications and provide 
various advantages over normal-gravity studies.  For example, the flicker of flame, which is a 
buoyancy-driven (i.e., gravity-driven) instability, is eliminated yielding quasi-steady flames in 
microgravity.  Length scales are increased in microgravity flames facilitating analysis of the flame 
structure.  Momentum-dominated flames, which are important for most practical combustion, 
can be studied at low velocities to simplify analysis.  Microgravity flames tend to have a much 
stronger sensitivity to their atmosphere and exhibit a much broader range of characteristics than 
normal-gravity flames because of the near absence of buoyant entrainment.  The long residence 
times in microgravity flames can lead to strong soot production, but many microgravity flames 
are soot free.  The absence of buoyancy makes microgravity flames advantageous for studies of 
limit and stability behavior where chemical kinetics are important.  With these advantages, 
microgravity testing can lead to new understanding of the complex nature of combustion – 
regardless of the gravitational environment of the combustion application. 
 
Flame Design should yield unique data that allows for a better understanding of how nitrogen 
exchange affects soot-inception and flame extinction, and how it can be used to design optimum 
flames.  In addition, the effects of flow direction are also studied, and the importance of the flow 
direction and flame structure to permanently-blue flames is assessed. 
 
 
 

=== PAGE 34 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
34 
 
 
II.  Methods/Research Operations 
  
A. Discussion of Method/Protocol 
Flame Design and other ACME experiments are configured, but not conducted, by the ISS 
crew.  The crew’s role is to set up the hardware, gas bottles, etc. for each set of tests.  The 
most common changes include the gas bottles on the Combustion Integrated Rack (CIR) 
and the mass flow controllers on the modular ACME chamber insert. 
 
All testing is commanded from the ground, specifically from the Glenn ISS Payload 
Operations Center (GIPOC).  The science portion of the testing is typically conducted in a 
nominally automated mode using pre-programmed scripts.  However, it may alternately 
be conducted in a ‘manual’ mode, where changes are made to a control parameter in 
response to the analog video downlink and the numerical data available in the telemetry 
stream.  For example, the flow rate can be adjusted to approach a flame’s soot limit.  This 
was not done during Increments 59 and 60, where the console commanding during a test 
was typically limited to halting the test when it was observed in the analog ops video that 
the flame had extinguished. 
 
Testing is not conducted when thrusters fire or spacecraft dock or undock from ISS to 
ensure an acceptable acceleration environment. 
 
Data is downlinked between each set of tests, i.e., day of testing, to allow for preliminary 
analysis and requisite planning for subsequent testing. 
 
 
III.  Results 
A. Baselined Activities Completed – Pre-flight, In-flight, Post-Flight 
The first round of Flame Design tests, during which a total of 188 flames were ignited, was 
conducted during Increments 59-60, more specifically from April-July.  These tests 
featured normal flames, where gaseous fuel was ejected from a porous spherical burner 
into an oxygen/nitrogen atmosphere.  In contrast, the upcoming second round will 
feature tests with inverse flames, where the oxidizer is ejected from the burner into a 
fuel/nitrogen atmosphere.  As a result, the second round flames will be ‘inside out.’  It is 
currently expected that the second round of tests will be conducted during Increment 63.  
The ‘interruption’ in the Flame Design testing was intentionally planned years in advance 
to enable the PI team to review the initial results in detail and with that knowledge plan 
the second round of tests to maximize its scientific outcome. 
 
Flame Design does not have living subjects like a life science experiment, but the tests are 
independently conducted with the gaseous fuel ethylene (C2H4).  It is a simple 
hydrocarbon gas for which the chemistry is well understood and it is typically highly 
sooting because of its carbon double bond.  The tests were conducted with both pure fuel 

=== PAGE 35 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
35 
 
 
and fuel mixed with nitrogen.   In the latter case, the ACME hardware allows for 
simultaneous flow of fuel (from a launched bottle) and ISS nitrogen to the burner, 
allowing for on-orbit fuel dilution and testing at a continuum of fuel concentrations. 
 
No samples (e.g., of soot) were collected for Flame Design; all of the ISS results were 
electronically transmitted to the ground.  That is furthermore the case for all currently 
planned ACME experiments. 
 
A summary log of the flames ignited during Increments 59-60, including a limited 
overview of the test conditions, is found in Table 1.  The table includes a limited overview 
of the test conditions.  For completeness, a row was included for testing on June 10 (GMT 
161) even though it was quickly discovered that the hot-wire igniter tip had failed at the 
end of preceding test day.  As a result, flames were not ignited until ten days later after 
astronaut Christina Koch had replaced the igniter tip.  
 
 
 

=== PAGE 36 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
36 
 
 
Table 1. 
Flame Design log of flames ignited in Increments 59-60 
 
Test 
day1 
Year Month Date 
Spherical 
burner2 
Burner 
reactant 
bottle 
Atmosphere 
concentration3 
Flames 
ignited4 
First round of tests, featuring normal flames, in April to July 2019 
19115 
2019 
4 
25 
serial 
number 
1002 
100% 
C2H4 
21% O2 
11 
19123 
5 
3 
21% O2 
19 
19137 
17 
21% O2 
20 
19142 
22 
40% O2 
8 
19150 
30 
30%, 40% O2 
15 
19156 
6 
5 
40% O2 
13 
19161 
10 
40% O2 
0 
19171 
20 
serial 
number 
1003 
40% O2 
12 
19175 
24 
40% O2 
14 
19182 
7 
1 
40% O2 
15 
19189 
8 
40% O2 
15 
19196 
15 
40% O2 
13 
19200 
19 
30%, 40% O2 
12 
19206 
25 
21% O2 
21 
1Test day includes the year as the first two digits followed by the 3-digit day of the year. 
2Spherical burner refers to the specific 0.25-inch diameter spherical burner used in the 
tests.  The porous sintered burners varied in quality, where this was especially evident 
at high burner flow rates. 
3Atmosphere concentration (as diluted with nitrogen on a volume basis) was varied 
between tests, where approximate concentrations - neglecting the vitiation from 
preceding tests - are listed for the tests that ignited.    The chamber pressure was also 
sometime varied but that secondary parameter is not included in this summary table. 
4Flames ignited is the number ignited on that day (neglecting the day change on ISS). 
 
Koch also swapped the porous spherical burner (serial number 1002) along with the 
igniter tip on June 10 (GMT 161), where it was determined that the initial burner’s 
performance was not satisfactory with high burner flow rates.  The flame ceased being 
spherical and its center didn’t coincide with the burner center.  The results indicated that 
the sintered attachment of the sphere to the supply tube was more porous than the 
sintered sphere itself, where the flame was shifted toward the supply tube.  The alternate 
burner (serial number 1003) showed similar behavior, but to a significantly reduced 
degree.  As a result, some of the early Flame Design testing was repeated after the burner 
swap. 
 
Pre-flight and post-flight activities are generally not addressed in this report. 
 

=== PAGE 37 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
37 
 
 
B. List of Preflight, In-flight, Postflight Anomalies 
1. Mission anomalies  
There were no significant anomalies hindering Flame Design operations during 
Increments 59-60, but there was a pertinent anomaly that had previously occurred.  
It was discovered on Feb. 4 (GMT 035) that the pressure was low in a check gas bottle 
for the CIR’s Gas Chromatograph Instrumentation Package (GCIP).  The bottle had 
been on the space station for 9 years, and the low pressure was attributed to a 
nominal leak rate.  The check gas was for calibration of the GCIP measurements and 
not needed for regular operations which proceeded unhindered.  The bottle was 
replaced on June 13 to enable the necessary calibration. 
 
2. Any other difficulties in obtaining scientific data   
Flame Design tests sometimes automatically aborted (due to the controlling software 
script), where that was typically prior to gas flow and the activation of the igniter.  As 
a result, there was little lost other than the time in the failed test attempt.   Such 
aborts normally occur because of communication issues with an Image Processing and 
Storage Unit (IPSU).  These are infrequent, but there are sometimes days when ACME 
tests have aborted repeatedly.  
 
ACME tests are of course also unsuccessful when the flame fails to ignite.  The first 
test of the day has sometimes failed to ignite, presumably because the fuel line has 
not been sufficiently primed.  Ignition was sometimes unsuccessful because the 
settings for the automatic flame detection are such that detection threshold is 
reached because of the igniter glow rather than a flame.  As a result of the detection, 
the hot-wire igniter is deactivated and retracted, which is of course an issue if the 
flame has yet to ignite.  This is typically avoided by detecting ignition with 
measurement of the flame’s OH* chemiluminescence with a Photomultiplier Tube 
(PMT) module.  The OH* chemiluminescence, in the ultraviolet at 310 nm, is a good 
indicator of an ignited flame rather than the glowing igniter, which emits primarily in 
the infrared and visible spectrum.  However, the combination of igniter settings and 
PMT gains can lead to false ignition detection. 
 
C. Completeness/Quality of Data 
The number of flames ignited in the round 1 testing significantly exceeds the normal-
flame tests which were specified as required in the ACME Integrated Science 
Requirements Document (ISRD).  A total of 41 normal-flame tests were identified as 
required for the Flame Design experiment.  In great contrast, 188 flames of this type were 
ignited in the experiment, so more than 4.5 times as many flames were ignited than 
required. 
 
However, as discussed in Section III.A, the performance of the first spherical burner was 
not always satisfactory – where the flame was not always sufficiently spherical or 
centered on the burner, suggesting extreme asymmetry in the flow field and thus 

=== PAGE 38 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
38 
 
 
questionable data.  Yet, 102 flames were ignited with the second burner, which is nearly 
2.5 times the number of required normal-flame tests. 
 
ACME’s sintered spherical burners do not yield spherically symmetric flames which are 
centered on the burner’s center, where that combination is important for true spherical 
symmetry.  This lack of symmetry is especially evident at high burner flows.  It is very likely 
that the sintered attachment of the sphere to the supply tube is more porous than the 
sintered sphere itself because the flame is seen to be shifted toward the supply tube.  
There was significant improvement when the starting burner (serial number 1002) was 
replaced mid-way through round 1 with an alternate burner (serial number 1003).  But 
the symmetry is not perfect and this is a shortcoming of the Flame Design data. 
 
Portions of ACME’s recorded image data is sometimes deleted without downlinking.  This 
is done because of operational constraints which limit the amount of data that can be 
managed per test day.  Given the constraint, the decision is sometimes made to sacrifice 
some image data (e.g., from the HiBMs camera) to allow additional tests to be conducted.  
This is intentionally done in order to maximize the scientific return of each day of testing 
within the project constraints. 
 
Data quality is of course dependent on the experimental hardware.  But neglecting that 
limitation on data quality, the cameras are sensitive to radiation where pixels gradually 
become ‘hot’ (i.e., dead) over time.  While these bright spots are addressed in image post-
processing, they are a degradation of the image quality. 
 
ACME’s Mass Flow Controllers (MFCs) used to control the flow of fuel and nitrogen have 
unfortunately not always performed adequately, where the flow rates have not always 
been appropriately steady.  The resulting effects on the flame behavior are tentatively 
assumed to be minor, but this still needs to be assessed. 
 
The ACME camera is not of sufficient quality to demonstrate the novel aspects of the 
experiments to the public, but it appears to be satisfactory from a science perspective. 
 
It is possible that the tests are subtly affected by the acceleration environment, but there 
is no obvious indication of this and this has thus far not been correlated with available 
measurements from the Space Acceleration Measurement System (SAMS).  In this regard, 
note that the Combustion Integrated Rack (CIR), in which the experiment is conducted, is 
equipped with a Passive Rack Isolation System (PaRIS).  
 
Regardless of the shortcomings discussed above, a great wealth of experimental data has 
been secured and Flame Design’s first round is considered to be at least minimally 
successful despite the imperfect symmetry.  Depending on the results of the data 
processing, the round may rate as highly successful. 
 

=== PAGE 39 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
39 
 
 
D. Status of Data Analysis 
The raw non-imaging data acquired from round 1 of Flame Design testing (e.g., gas flow 
rates, burner surface temperature, photomultiplier tube measurements of flame 
emissions, radiometer measurements of flame thermal emission, far-field gas 
temperatures, and pressures) has been converted to engineering units . All of the raw 
(hobj) images obtained from the ACME camera have been successfully converted to tiff 
files for further analysis.  Thin filament pyrometry is being used to obtain fiber 
temperature measurements in ACME camera images that have SiC fibers inserted in the 
flame.  Soot temperature measurements using two-color ratio pyrometry are being 
acquired from ACME camera images that have soot and no fibers.  Burn time and 
extinction diameter have been acquired for radiatively extinguishing flames using the 
photomultiplier tubes and analog camera, respectively.  HiBMs camera images are being 
examined for use in calculating the soot volume fraction.  Intensified camera images have 
yet to be analyzed. 
 
A one-dimensional computational model is being implemented to assist in the 
investigation of spherical diffusion flames in microgravity.  Also, collaborations are 
underway with scientists at the Russian Academy of Sciences for further simulations.  The 
Russian team is focusing on detailed chemistry and more realistic boundary conditions, 
while the US team is focusing on a general understanding of the flame dynamics. 
 
E. Preliminary Research Findings 
Flame Design results have shown that spherical diffusion flames in microgravity have 
unique characteristics that are valuable for fundamental studies of diffusion flames. 
Flame size increases with reactant flow rate and decreases with ambient oxygen 
concentration.  Radiative heat loss scales with flame size such that very small flames - just 
above their kinetic extinction limits - have low radiative loss, and asymptotically approach 
steady-state behavior.  Larger flames increase in size over time until the rate of radiative 
heat loss exceeds the rate of chemical heat release, and the flame extinguishes via 
radiative extinction.  Before total extinction occurs in these flames, they experience an 
unstable, oscillatory mode, in which they partially extinguish and reform.  The oscillations 
grow in magnitude until total extinction.  For constant ambient oxygen concentration, 
larger flames (with higher fuel flow rates) radiatively extinguish faster than smaller flames 
(with lower flow rates) due to higher radiative losses and decreasing chemical heat 
release.  Small, asymptotically quasi-steady flames are found to have low radiative losses 
and nearly constant chemical heat release. A thorough analysis of low flow rate flames 
was completed in order to investigate the existence of steady-state spherical flames, 
which has been a subject of debate in literature. This analysis is described in the 
submission to the 38th International Symposium on Combustion cited below. 
1. P. Irace, H. Lee, K. Waddell, L. Tan, D. Stocker, D. Urban, P. Sunderland, and R. 
Axelbaum, “Steady-state burner stabilized spherical diffusion flames in 
microgravity,” 38th International Symposium on Combustion, Adelaide, Australia, 
2020. 

=== PAGE 40 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
40 
 
 
The abstract from this submission states: 
This study is an examination of steady-state behavior in spherical diffusion flames 
in microgravity on the International Space Station (ISS). Gaseous spherical 
diffusion flames stabilized on a porous sphere were employed in a normal 
configuration (i.e., fuel issuing into an ambient oxidizer). The use of a porous 
sphere allowed for a spherical flame with a constant mass flow rate, a condition 
that is not attainable with free-droplet combustion.  Unlike previous microgravity 
spherical flame studies, time is not a limitation for these experiments, and the 
potential to achieve steady-state flames can be explored for the first time.   
Stoichiometric mixture fraction, Zst, and flame temperature were varied by 
diluting the fuel with nitrogen, or changing the ambient oxygen concentration, 
either 21 or 40 vol% oxygen. Flame size was found to increase with increasing fuel 
flow rate and decrease with increasing ambient oxygen concentration. The large 
spherical diffusion flames were observed to grow until extinction, while small 
flames were found to exhibit an asymptotically steady behavior due to their low 
radiative losses and faster transport.  Experimental measurements of flame size 
were in quantitative agreement with numerical results with one-step chemistry, 
provided the diffusivity was appropriately adjusted. For the small flame sizes that 
are necessary to achieve steady-state flames, the burner acts as a heat sink, and 
as the burner temperature increases, its cooling effect on the flame diminishes, 
and the flame temperature increases. Accordingly, fiber temperatures measured 
using two-color ratio pyrometry showed increasing temperature with time for the 
flames examined. Flame emissions of OH* (310 nm) measured with a 
photomultiplier tube and a bandpass filter showed a steady intensity after the 
initial ignition transient. The flames investigated appear to be asymptotically 
approaching a steady-state size and temperature, however, a decisive conclusion 
cannot be made because of burner heating. 
 
Early Flame Design results from the ISS testing were presented in the following oral 
presentations: 
1. Richard Axelbaum, Peter Sunderland, and David Urban, “ACME - Flame Design,” 
ISS Increments 61 & 62 Science Symposium, 17-19 Sept. 2019. 
2. P. Irace, R.L. Axelbaum, and P.B. Sunderland, “Radiative and Kinetic Extinction of 
Gaseous Spherical Diffusion Flames in Microgravity,” 35th Annual Meeting of the 
American Society for Gravitational and Space Research, Denver, CO, 20-23 Nov. 
2019. 
 
F. Communication Imagery 
1. Still Imagery 
Photos are available online at www.flickr.com/photos/space-flames.  Although 
the Facebook page at www.facebook.com/space.flames is meant to provide 
updates on ACME and related combustion research, it is good source for recent 
photos, e.g., of flames, that may not be available on the Flickr site.  Additional 

=== PAGE 41 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
41 
 
 
photographs may be requested from the Project Scientist, Dennis Stocker 
(dennis.p.stocker@nasa.gov). 
 
2. Video 
An example video from the Flame Design experiment can be found with the web-
based article at: 
https://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/station/research/news/combustion-
research-microgravity-clean-burning-fuel-space-station/. 
 
‘The Power of Studying Combustion on the ISS,’ which was developed with input 
from the ACME Project Scientist, is available at https://science.nasa.gov/science-
news/news-articles/the-power-of-studying-combustion-on-the-iss. 
 
Video(s) describing the ACME project can be found at: 
https://www1.grc.nasa.gov/space/iss-research/iss-fcf/cir/acme/. 
 
Videos related to Flame Design and other microgravity combustion research can 
also be seen on Facebook at www.facebook.com/space.flames. 
  
Contact Dennis Stocker (dennis.p.stocker@nasa.gov) for access to those videos or 
for additional videos. 
 
 
IV. Additional Comments from science team 
Constantly sooting flames were only observed in 40% oxygen and high fuel concentrations.  In 
21% oxygen, small flames did not soot because of heat loss to the burner and large flames did 
not soot because high radiative losses caused the flame temperature to quickly drop below the 
sooting limit.  Preliminary analysis of the HiBMs images suggests that significant emission of light 
from soot particles and dissymmetry of the soot cloud will make acquiring accurate soot volume 
fraction measurements difficult, if possible. The cloud of soot particles also shows relatively 
extreme dissymmetry, further complicating our ability to obtain soot volume fraction 
measurements. 
 
 

=== PAGE 42 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
42 
 
 
Appendix C. 30-Day Operational Accomplishments Report for ISS 
Increment 66 
Table I was corrected where the report submitted in July 2022 incorrectly identified the fuel used 
on 28 Oct. 2021 as 100% ethylene (C2H4) when it was 100% C3H8. 
 
6 July 2022 
30-day Operational Accomplishments Report  
… for the International Space Station (ISS) Increments 66 
 
ACME 
Advanced Combustion via Microgravity Experiments 
Flame Design 
 
Flame Design is one of six independent experiments that are part of the ACME project, which used 
a single modular set of hardware to carry out studies of flames burning gaseous fuels in the ISS’ 
Combustion Integrated Rack (CIR).  The investigation was carried out in two rounds of tests which 
occurred in Increments 59/60 and 66.  This report comprehensively addresses both rounds of 
Flame Design testing. 
 
Prepared by the PI team and Dennis Stocker (dennis.p.stocker@nasa.gov), the ACME Project 
Scientist, who is the primary contact for Flame Design and ACME information. 
 
 
 
Principal Investigator (PI): 
Prof. Richard L. Axelbaum, Washington University in St. Louis, MO 
Co-Investigator (Co-I): 
Prof. Peter B. Sunderland, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 
Co-Investigator (Co-I): 
Dr. David L. Urban, NASA Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, OH 
Lead collaborator: 
Dr. Sergei Frolov, N.N. Semenov Institute of Chemical Physics, 
Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russia 
NASA Project Scientist (PS): Dennis P. Stocker, NASA Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, OH 
PS team members: 
Dr. Uday G. Hegde, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, 
OH 
 
Dr. Vedha Nayagam, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, 
OH 
 
 
 
I.  Introduction 
The Flame Design experiment is conducted in the Combustion Integrated Rack (CIR) on the 
International Space Station, as part of the Advanced Combustion via Microgravity Experiments 
(ACME) project.  The primary goal of the Flame Design experiment is to improve the 
understanding of soot inception and control, in order to enable the optimization of oxygen 
enriched combustion and the ‘design’ of non-premixed flames that are both robust and soot free.  

=== PAGE 43 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
43 
 
 
An outside review panel declared that Flame Design “… could lead to greatly improved burner 
designs that are efficient and less polluting than current designs."   
 
Flame Design investigates the soot inception and extinction limits of spherical microgravity 
flames created with porous spherical burners.  Tests are conducted with various concentrations 
of both the fuel (e.g., ethylene) and oxygen in order to determine the role of the flame structure 
on the soot inception. 
 
More specifically, Flame Design has the following experimental objectives which are listed here 
in priority order.  It must be emphasized that NASA does not currently plan to carry out the 
desired or highly desired testing with carbon dioxide, pressure as a variable (except to a limited 
degree), coflow flames, or methane. 
D. Obtain soot-inception limits of quasi-steady normal and inverse spherical diffusion flames 
as functions of flow rate, Zst, amount of inert (N2 or CO2**), and pressure** for C2H4 
and CH4* flames.  Identify the corresponding temperatures in hot regions.  Obtain similar 
limits and temperatures for inverse and normal coflow flames**. 
E. Obtain detailed measurements in quasi-steady normal and inverse spherical diffusion 
flames for C2H4 and CH4*.  Determine the effects of flow rate, Zst, amount of inert (N2 
or CO2**), and pressure** on flame temperature, size, color, and soot volume fraction.  
Evaluate the possible existence of steady flames. Obtain similar measurements for inverse 
and normal coflow flames**. 
F. Obtain extinction limits as functions of Zst, amount of inert (N2 or CO2**), and pressure** 
for normal and inverse spherical C2H4 and CH4 * flames.  Identify the corresponding 
temperatures in hot regions. Identify the presence of radiative or kinetic extinction.  
Evaluate whether pseudo-flammability limits can be obtained for these flames.  Measure 
blowoff limits for inverse and normal coflow flames**. 
*desired; **highly desired 
 
The majority of practical combustion processes involve the non-premixed combustion of 
hydrocarbons.  These processes must be efficient, and the resulting emissions must be low.  For 
example, soot production, which can adversely affect efficiency, emissions, and equipment 
lifetime, must be controlled, and flame extinction must be avoided.  Many methods have been 
considered to reduce soot, such as increasing inert concentrations and reducing pressures, but 
these techniques generally weaken flames, leading to performance penalties and possible 
extinction. 
 
The Flame Design study considers an innovative method of approaching combustion to address 
these concerns. The approach is termed flame design, as it takes a fundamental understanding 
of diffusion flames and, within the inherent constraints imposed, designs flames that best 
optimize efficiency and minimize pollutants. 
 
Flame design involves affecting the basic structure of the flame, in that the relationship between 
the temperature and concentration fields is varied to accomplish the desired objective.  This 

=== PAGE 44 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
44 
 
 
method involves shifting the nitrogen from the air (or oxygen/nitrogen mixture) to the fuel 
stream, such that the mixing that occurs at the flame can be varied with or without affecting the 
flame temperature.  [This can also be done with inerts other than nitrogen and oxygen/inert 
mixtures other than air.]  Such nitrogen exchange has enabled the production of the flames that 
are soot-free at all flow conditions, i.e., which are ‘permanently blue.’ 
 
The Flame Design experiment involves gaseous hydrocarbon diffusion flames supported on a 
porous spherical burner.  Soot inception limits and flame extinction limits are obtained as 
functions of the nitrogen exchange, flow direction, and pressure.  Extensive analytical and 
computational modeling support the experimental investigation, where they are facilitated by 
the spherical flame shape enabled by the microgravity environment.  Models include gas-phase 
and burner-surface radiation. 
 
Buoyant gravity-driven flow complicates the interpretation of the existing results and has led to 
different theories to explain the permanently-blue diffusion flames.  It is not known whether this 
phenomenon is due more to a change in the direction of convection across the flame, or to a 
change in the detailed structure of the flame. 
 
The challenges of normal-gravity studies are avoided by performing the tests on the International 
Space Station (ISS), where the non-buoyant microgravity flames allow the effects of convection 
direction and flame structure to be independently varied.  By ejecting fuel from the burner into 
an oxidizer (e.g., air) in a buoyancy free system, the convective flow across the flame is 
unambiguously from fuel to oxidizer. Alternatively, by ejecting oxidizer from the burner into an 
atmosphere of fuel, the flow is from oxidizer to fuel. 
 
Furthermore, microgravity studies of flames allow for a range of simplifications and provide 
various advantages over normal-gravity studies.  For example, the flicker of flame, which is a 
buoyancy-driven (i.e., gravity-driven) instability, is eliminated yielding quasi-steady flames in 
microgravity.  Length scales are increased in microgravity flames facilitating analysis of the flame 
structure.  Momentum-dominated flames, which are important for most practical combustion, 
can be studied at low velocities to simplify analysis.  Microgravity flames tend to have a much 
stronger sensitivity to their atmosphere and exhibit a much broader range of characteristics than 
normal-gravity flames because of the near absence of buoyant entrainment.  The long residence 
times in microgravity flames can lead to strong soot production, but many microgravity flames 
are soot free.  The absence of buoyancy makes microgravity flames advantageous for studies of 
limit and stability behavior where chemical kinetics are important.  With these advantages, 
microgravity testing can lead to new understanding of the complex nature of combustion – 
regardless of the gravitational environment of the combustion application. 
 
Flame Design should yield unique data that allows for a better understanding of how nitrogen 
exchange affects soot-inception and flame extinction, and how it can be used to design optimum 
flames.  In addition, the effects of flow direction are also studied, and the importance of the flow 
direction and flame structure to permanently-blue flames is assessed. 

=== PAGE 45 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
45 
 
 
II.  Methods/Research Operations 
  
B. Discussion of Method/Protocol 
Flame Design and other ACME experiments were configured, but not conducted, by the 
ISS crew.  The crew’s role was to set up the hardware, gas bottles, etc. for each set of 
tests.  The most common changes included the gas bottles on the Combustion Integrated 
Rack (CIR) and the mass flow controllers on the modular ACME chamber insert. 
 
All ACME testing was commanded from the ground, specifically from the Glenn ISS 
Payload Operations Center (GIPOC).  The science portion of ACME testing was conducted 
in a nominally automated mode using pre-programmed scripts.  While it was possible to 
make some ‘manual’ changes outside of the script, e.g., to approach a flame’s soot limit, 
during a test that was not done in any ACME testing, neglecting minor exceptions, e.g., to 
terminate tests after the flames had extinguished. 
 
Testing was not conducted when thrusters fired or spacecraft docked or undocked from 
ISS to ensure an acceptable acceleration environment. 
 
Data was downlinked between each set of tests, i.e., day of testing, to allow for 
preliminary analysis and requisite planning for subsequent testing. 
 
 
III.  Results 
G. Baselined Activities Completed – Pre-flight, In-flight, Post-Flight 
A total of 326 flames were ignited for the Flame Design experiment during Increments 
59/50 and 66, where 188 and 138 flames were ignited in the two increments, respectively. 
 
The first-round tests featured normal flames, where gaseous fuel was ejected from a 
porous spherical burner into an oxygen/nitrogen atmosphere.  In contrast, the second 
round - except for its first test day - was carried out with inverse flames, in which the 
oxidizer is ejected from the burner into a fuel/nitrogen atmosphere.  As a result, the 
second-round flames were ‘inside out.’  The ‘interruption’ in the Flame Design testing was 
intentionally planned years in advance to enable the PI team to review the initial results 
in detail and with that knowledge plan the second round of tests to maximize its scientific 
outcome. 
 
Flame Design did not have living subjects like a life science experiment, where the tests 
were conducted with the gaseous fuel ethylene (C2H4).  It is a simple hydrocarbon gas for 
which the chemistry is well understood and it is typically highly sooting because of its 
carbon double bond.  The tests were conducted with both pure fuel and fuel mixed with 
nitrogen.   In the latter case, the ACME hardware allows for simultaneous flow of fuel 

=== PAGE 46 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
46 
 
 
(from a launched bottle) and ISS nitrogen to the burner, allowing for on-orbit fuel dilution 
and testing at a continuum of fuel concentrations. 
 
No samples (e.g., of soot) were collected for Flame Design; all of the ISS results were 
electronically transmitted to the ground.  That is furthermore the case for all ACME 
experiments. 
 
A summary log of the flames ignited during Increments 59/60 and 66, including a limited 
overview of the test conditions, is found in Table 1.  The table includes a limited overview 
of the test conditions.  For completeness, a row was included for testing on June 10 (GMT 
161) even though it was quickly discovered that the hot-wire igniter tip had failed at the 
end of preceding test day.  As a result, flames were not ignited until ten days later after 
astronaut Christina Koch had replaced the igniter tip.  
 
Koch also swapped the porous spherical burner (serial number 1002) along with the 
igniter tip on June 10 (GMT 161), where it was determined that the initial burner’s 
performance was not satisfactory with high burner flow rates.  The flame ceased being 
spherical and its center didn’t coincide with the burner center.  The results indicated that 
the sintered attachment of the sphere to the supply tube was more porous than the 
sintered sphere itself, where the flame was shifted toward the supply tube.  The alternate 
burner (serial number 1003) showed similar behavior, but to a significantly reduced 
degree.  As a result, some of the early Flame Design testing was repeated after the burner 
swap. 
 
Pre-flight and post-flight activities are generally not addressed in this report. 
 
 
 

=== PAGE 47 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
47 
 
 
Table 1. 
Flame Design log of flames ignited in Increments 59/60 and 66 
 
Test 
day1 
Year Month Date 
Spherical 
burner2 
Burner 
reactant 
bottle 
Atmosphere 
concentration3 
Flames 
ignited4 
First round of tests, featuring normal flames, in April to July 2019 
19115 
2019 
4 
25 
serial 
number 
1002 
100% 
C2H4 
21% O2 
11 
19123 
5 
3 
21% O2 
19 
19137 
17 
21% O2 
20 
19142 
22 
40% O2 
8 
19150 
30 
30%, 40% O2 
15 
19156 
6 
5 
40% O2 
13 
19161 
10 
40% O2 
0 
19171 
20 
serial 
number 
1003 
40% O2 
12 
19175 
24 
40% O2 
14 
19182 
7 
1 
40% O2 
15 
19189 
8 
40% O2 
15 
19196 
15 
40% O2 
13 
19200 
19 
30%, 40% O2 
12 
19206 
25 
21% O2 
21 
Second round of tests, mostly featuring inverse flames, in Oct. 2021 to Feb. 2022 
21301 
2021 
10 
28 
serial 
number 
1003 
100% 
C3H8 
40% O2 
18 
21328 
11 
24 
85% O2 
27%, 8% C2H4  
9 
21340 
12 
6 
17%, 12% C2H4 
13 
21349 
15 
65%, 27.5% 
C2H4 
15 
21361 
27 
20% C2H4 
20 
22018 
2022 
1 
18 
17%, 10% C2H4 
12 
22024 
24 
19% C2H4 
20 
22027 
27 
10% C2H4 
16 
22035 
2 
4 
17%, 10% C2H4 
15 
1Test day includes the year as the first two digits followed by the 3-digit day of the year. 
2Spherical burner refers to the specific 0.25-inch diameter spherical burner used in the 
tests.  The porous sintered burners varied in quality, where this was especially evident 
at high burner flow rates. 
3Atmosphere concentration (as diluted with nitrogen on a volume basis) was varied 
between tests, where approximate concentrations - neglecting the vitiation from 
preceding tests - are listed for the tests that ignited.    The chamber pressure was also 
sometime varied but that secondary parameter is not included in this summary table. 
4Flames ignited is the number ignited on that day (neglecting the day change on ISS). 
 

=== PAGE 48 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
48 
 
 
H. List of Preflight, In-flight, Postflight Anomalies 
3. Mission anomalies 
There were no significant anomalies hindering Flame Design operations during 
Increments 59-60, but there was a pertinent anomaly that had previously occurred.  
It was discovered on 4 Feb. 2019 (GMT 035) that the pressure was low in a check gas 
bottle for the CIR’s Gas Chromatograph Instrumentation Package (GCIP).  The bottle 
had been on the space station for 9 years, and the low pressure was attributed to a 
nominal leak rate.  The check gas was for calibration of the GCIP measurements and 
not needed for regular operations which proceeded unhindered.  The bottle was 
replaced on June 13 to enable the necessary calibration. 
 
On 27 Dec. 2021 (GMT 361), during Increment 66, it was determined that the Thin 
Filament Pyrometry (TFP) fiber array was not aligned to the ACME Data Camera 
(DataCam) as intended, i.e., so that the fibers would be orthogonal relative to the 
camera.  Unfortunately, this was the fourth day of testing in which the fiber array 
wasn’t aligned, where it regrettably wasn’t recognized earlier.  Given the importance 
of the TFP-derived measurements of the flame temperature, testing was halted until 
the array was aligned (with other crew tasks) by Raja Chari on 17 Jan. 2022 (GMT 017). 
 
4. Any other difficulties in obtaining scientific data  
Flame Design tests sometimes automatically aborted (due to the controlling software 
script), where that was typically prior to gas flow and the activation of the igniter.  As 
a result, there was little lost other than the time in the failed test attempt.   Such 
aborts normally occured because of communication issues with an Image Processing 
and Storage Unit (IPSU).  These were infrequent, but there were some days when 
ACME tests aborted repeatedly.  
 
ACME tests were of course also unsuccessful when the flame fails to ignite.  In the first 
round of Flame Design testing, the igniter tip failed twice requiring crew time to be 
scheduled to replace it before the subsequent test day could be conducted.  
Regrettably, it was sometimes discovered during ACME testing that the igniter had 
failed during the final test of the preceding test day, where an example was on 10 
June 2019 (19161) when no flames were ignited as a result (as discussed in section 
III.A).  An igniter check was subsequently added to the ACME end-of-test-day 
procedure to avoid such recurrences.  However, on another test day, it was believed 
that the igniter tip had failed but ignition was instead prevented because the chamber 
pressure exceeded the pressure switch limit.  Ignition was achieved after the chamber 
pressure was appropriately reduced. 
 
The first test of the day has also sometimes failed to ignite, presumably because the 
fuel line has not been sufficiently primed.  Ignition was also sometimes unsuccessful 
because the settings for the automatic flame detection were such that the detection 
threshold was reached because of the igniter glow rather than a flame.  As a result of 

=== PAGE 49 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
49 
 
 
the detection, the hot-wire igniter was deactivated and retracted, which was of course 
an issue when the flame has yet to ignite.  This was typically avoided by detecting 
ignition with measurement of the flame’s OH* chemiluminescence with a 
Photomultiplier Tube (PMT) module.  The OH* chemiluminescence, in the ultraviolet 
at 310 nm, is a good indicator of an ignited flame rather than the glowing igniter, 
which emits primarily in the infrared and visible spectrum.  However, the combination 
of igniter settings and PMT gains can lead to false ignition detection. 
 
I. Completeness/Quality of Data 
The 326 flames ignited in the two rounds of greatly exceeds the 76 tests which were 
specified as required in the ACME Integrated Science Requirements Document (ISRD).  As 
a result, more than 4.2 times as many flames were ignited than required. 
 
However, as discussed in Section III.A, the performance of the first spherical burner was 
not always satisfactory – where the flame was not always sufficiently spherical or 
centered on the burner, suggesting extreme asymmetry in the flow field and thus 
questionable data.  Yet, 240 flames were ignited with the second burner, which is over 
3.1 times the number of required tests. 
 
ACME’s sintered spherical burners do not yield spherically symmetric flames which are 
centered on the burner’s center, where that combination is important for true spherical 
symmetry.  This lack of symmetry was especially evident at high burner flows.  It is very 
likely that the sintered attachment of the sphere to the supply tube is more porous than 
the sintered sphere itself because the flame is seen to be shifted toward the supply tube.  
There was significant improvement when the starting burner (serial number 1002) was 
replaced mid-way through round 1 with an alternate burner (serial number 1003).  But 
the symmetry is not perfect and this is a shortcoming of the Flame Design data. 
 
Portions of ACME’s recorded image data were sometimes deleted without downlinking.  
This was done because of operational constraints which limit the amount of data that can 
be managed per test day.  Given the constraint, the decision was sometimes made to 
sacrifice some image data (e.g., from the HiBMs camera) to allow additional tests to be 
conducted.  This was intentionally done in order to maximize the scientific return of each 
day of testing within the project constraints. 
 
The signal from the ACME radiometer array used in round 1 of Flame Design testing was 
saturated for nearly every test, yielding non-useful data. For round 2 of FLame Design, 
the radiometer array was replaced with the radiometer array designed for Cool Flames 
Investigation with Gases (CFI-G) which yielded satisfactory measurements. 
 
Data quality is of course dependent on the experimental hardware.  But neglecting that 
limitation on data quality, the cameras are sensitive to radiation where pixels gradually 

=== PAGE 50 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
50 
 
 
become ‘hot’ (i.e., dead) over time.  While these bright spots are addressed in image post-
processing, they are a degradation of the image quality. 
 
ACME’s Mass Flow Controllers (MFCs) used to control the flow of fuel, nitrogen, and 
oxidizer did not always performed adequately, where the flow rates were not always 
appropriately steady or at the intended value.  The resulting effects on the flame behavior 
are tentatively assumed to be minor, but this still needs to be assessed. 
 
The ACME camera is not of sufficient quality to demonstrate the novel aspects of the 
experiments to the public, but it appears to have been satisfactory from a science 
perspective. 
 
It is possible that the tests were subtly affected by the acceleration environment, but 
there was no obvious indication of such effects.  However, the Flame Design data has not 
been correlated with available measurements from the Space Acceleration Measurement 
System (SAMS).  Although the Combustion Integrated Rack (CIR) is equipped with a 
Passive Rack Isolation System (PaRIS), it was not used for ACME because of the significant 
need for crew time that would have resulted.  
 
Regardless of the shortcomings discussed above, a great wealth of experimental data has 
been secured and Flame Design’s first round is considered to be at least minimally 
successful despite the imperfect symmetry.  Depending on the results of the data 
processing, the round may rate as highly successful. 
 
Similarly, a great wealth of experimental data was secured during Flame Design’s second 
round of testing. Flame Design’s second round is considered to be at least minimally 
successful, and depending on the results of data processing, may be rated as highly 
successful. 
 
J. Status of Data Analysis  
The raw non-imaging data acquired from round 1 of Flame Design testing (e.g., gas flow 
rates, burner surface temperature, photomultiplier tube measurements of flame 
emissions, far-field gas temperatures, and pressures) has been converted to engineering 
units.  All the raw (hobj) images obtained from the ACME camera have been successfully 
converted to tiff files for further analysis.  Thin filament pyrometry is being used to obtain 
fiber temperature measurements in ACME camera images that have SiC fibers inserted in 
the flame.  Soot temperature measurements using two-color ratio pyrometry are being 
acquired from ACME camera images that have soot and no fibers.  Burn time and 
extinction diameter have been acquired for radiatively extinguishing flames using the 
photomultiplier tubes and analog camera, respectively.  HiBMs camera images are being 

=== PAGE 51 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
51 
 
 
examined for use in calculating the soot volume fraction.  Intensified camera images have 
yet to be analyzed. 
 
The raw non-imaging data acquired from round 2 of Flame Design testing (e.g., gas flow 
rates, burner surface temperature, photomultiplier tube measurements of flame 
emissions, radiometer measurements of flame thermal emission, far-field gas 
temperatures, and pressures) has been converted to engineering units.  All the raw (hobj) 
images obtained from the ACME camera have been successfully converted to tiff files for 
further analysis.  Thin filament pyrometry is being used to obtain fiber temperature 
measurements in ACME camera images that have SiC fibers inserted in the flame.  Burn 
time and extinction diameter have been acquired for radiatively extinguishing flames 
using the photomultiplier tubes and analog camera, respectively.  Intensified camera 
images have yet to be analyzed. 
 
A one-dimensional computational model is being implemented to assist in the 
investigation of spherical diffusion flames in microgravity.  Also, collaborations are 
underway with scientists at the Russian Academy of Sciences for further simulations.  The 
Russian team is focusing on the porous spherical burner and more realistic boundary 
conditions, while the US team is focusing on a general understanding of the flame 
dynamics. 
 
K. Preliminary Research Findings 
Flame Design results have shown that spherical diffusion flames in microgravity have 
unique characteristics that are valuable for fundamental studies of diffusion flames. 
Flame size increases with reactant flow rate and decreases with ambient oxygen 
concentration.  Radiative heat loss scales with flame size such that very small flames - just 
above their kinetic extinction limits - have low radiative loss, and asymptotically approach 
steady-state behavior.  Larger flames increase in size over time until the rate of radiative 
heat loss becomes sufficiently large, and the flame extinguishes via radiative extinction.  
Before total extinction occurs in these flames, they experience an unstable, oscillatory 
mode, in which they partially extinguish and reform.  The oscillations grow in magnitude 
until total extinction.  For constant ambient oxygen concentration, larger flames (with 
higher fuel flow rates) radiatively extinguish faster than smaller flames (with lower flow 
rates) due to higher radiative losses and decreasing chemical heat release.  A thorough 
analysis of low flow rate flames was completed in order to investigate the existence of 
steady-state spherical flames, which has been a subject of debate in literature.  It was 
found that steady state microgravity spherical diffusion flames can exist.  Furthermore, it 
was found that ethylene microgravity spherical diffusion flames at 1 bar extinguish at a 
critical extinction point defined by an extinction flame temperature and an extinction 
reactant mass flux at the flame.  These analyses are described in the manuscripts 
accepted for the 39th International Symposium on Combustion cited below. 
 

=== PAGE 52 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
52 
 
 
2. P.H. Irace, K.A. Waddell, D. Constales, G. Yablonsky, M. Kim, P.B. Sunderland, R.L. 
Axelbaum, On the existence of steady state gaseous microgravity spherical 
diffusion flames in the presence of radiation heat loss, Proceedings of the 
Combustion Institute 2022 (accepted). 
The abstract from this submission states: 
Whether steady-state gaseous microgravity spherical diffusion exist in the 
presence of radiation heat loss is an important fundamental question and has 
important implications for spacecraft fire safety.  In this work, experiments aboard 
the International Space Station and a transient numerical model are used to 
investigate the existence of steady-state microgravity spherical diffusion flames. 
Gaseous spherical diffusion flames stabilized on a porous spherical burner are 
employed in normal (i.e., fuel flowing into an ambient oxidizer) and inverse (i.e., 
oxidizer flowing into an ambient fuel) flame configurations.  The fuel is ethylene 
and the oxidizer oxygen, both diluted with nitrogen.  The flow rate of the reactant 
gas from the burner is held constant.  It is found that steady-state gaseous 
microgravity spherical diffusion flames do exist in the presence of radiation heat 
loss, provided that the steady-state flame size is less than the flame size for 
radiative extinction, and the flame develops fast enough that radiation heat loss 
does not drop the flame temperature below the critical temperature for radiative 
extinction (1130 K).  A simple model is provided that allows for the identification 
of initial conditions that can lead to steady-state spherical diffusion flames.  In the 
spherical, infinite domain configuration, the characteristic time for the diffusion -
controlled system to effectively reach steady-state is found to be on the order of 
100,000 s.  Despite a narrow range of attainable conditions, flames that exhibit 
steady-state behavior are observed aboard the ISS for up to 870 s, even with the 
constraint of a finite boundary.  Steady-state flames are simulated using the 
numerical model for over 100,000 s. 
 
2. P.H. Irace, K.A. Waddell, D. Constales, P.B. Sunderland, R.L. Axelbaum, Critical 
temperature and reactant mass flux for radiative extinction of ethylene 
microgravity spherical diffusion flames at 1 bar, Proceedings of the Combustion 
Institute 2022 (accepted). 
The abstract from this submission states: 
In microgravity combustion, where buoyancy is not present to accelerate the flow 
field and strain the flame, radiative extinction is of fundamental importance, and 
has implications for spacecraft fire safety.  In this work, the critical point for 
radiative extinction is identified for normal and inverse ethylene spherical 
diffusion flames via atmospheric pressure experiments conducted aboard the 
International Space Station, combined with a transient numerical model.  The fuel 
is ethylene with nitrogen diluent, and the oxidizer is an oxygen/nitrogen mixture. 
The burner is a porous stainless-steel sphere.  All experiments are conducted at 
constant reactant flow rate.  Conditions for the normal flames: ambient oxygen 
mole fraction from 0.2 to 0.38, burner supply fuel mole fraction from 0.13 to 1, 

=== PAGE 53 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
53 
 
 
total mass flow rate, ṁtotal, from 0.6 to 12.2 mg/s, and adiabatic flame 
temperature, Tad, from 2000 to 2800 K.  Conditions for inverse flames: ambient 
fuel mole fraction from 0.08 to 0.12, burner supply oxygen mole fraction from 0.4 
to 0.85, ṁtotal from 2.3 to 11.3 mg/s, and Tad from 2080 to 2590 K.  It is found that 
despite the broad range of conditions, all of the flames extinguish at a critical 
extinction temperature of 1130 K, and at a fuel-based mass flux of 0.2 g/m2-s for 
normal flames, and an oxygen-based mass flux of 0.68 g/m2-s for inverse flames. 
With this information, a simple equation is developed to estimate the flame size 
(i.e., location of peak temperature) at extinction for any atmospheric-pressure 
ethylene spherical diffusion flame given only the reactant mass flow rate.  Flame 
growth, which ultimately leads to radiative extinction if the critical extinction point 
is reached, is attributed to the natural development of a diffusion limited system 
as it approaches steady state and the dependence of transport properties on 
temperature as temperature is reduced by radiation (i.e., radiation-induced 
growth). 
 
Flame Design publications with ISS data include: 
1. P.H. Irace, H. Lee, K. Waddell, L. Tan, D.P. Stocker, P.B. Sunderland, R.L. Axelbaum, 
Observations of long duration microgravity spherical diffusion flames aboard the 
International Space Station, Combustion and Flame, 229 (2021) 111373. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2021.02.019 
2. P.H. Irace, K. Waddell, D. Constales, P.B. Sunderland, R.L. Axelbaum, Critical 
temperature and reactant mass flux for radiative extinction of ethylene 
microgravity spherical diffusion flames at 1 bar, Proc. Combust. Inst. (accepted). 
3. P.H. Irace, K Waddell, D. Constales, G. Yablonsky, M. Kim, P.B. Sunderland, R.L. 
Axelbaum, On the existence of steady state gaseous microgravity spherical 
diffusion flames in the presence of radiation heat loss, Proc. Combust. Inst. 
(accepted). 
 
Conference presentations, posters, etc. with ISS results have included:  
1. P. Irace, L. Tan, K. Waddell, H.J. Lee, D.P. Stocker, D.L. Urban, P.B. Sunderland, R.L. 
Axelbaum, A Galaxy of Soot Particles, Art Competition Entry, ASGSR, Denver, 2019. 
2. P. Irace, H.J. Lee, K. Waddell, L. Tan, D.P. Stocker, D.L. Urban, P.B. Sunderland, R.L. 
Axelbaum, Steady-State and Radiatively Extinguishing Spherical Diffusion Flames 
in Microgravity, Abstract, ASGSR, Denver, 2019. 
3. P.H. Irace, H.J. Lee, K. Waddell, L. Tan, D.P. Stocker, P.B. Sunderland, R.L. 
Axelbaum, Observations of Long Duration Microgravity Spherical Diffusion Flames 
Aboard the International Space Station, Abstract, Annual ASGSR Meeting, 2020. 
4. P. Irace, L. Tan, K. Waddell, H.J. Lee, D. Stocker, D.L. Urban, P.B. Sunderland, R.L. 
Axelbaum, Flame Ignition in Space, Art Competition Poster, ASGSR, 2020.  
5. K. Waddell, P.B. Sunderland, S. Medvedev, S. Frolov, P.H. Irace, R.L. Axelbaum, 
Flame and Burner Temperature Measurements and Predictions in Spherical 
Diffusion Flames, U.S. National Combustion Meeting, 2021, 9 pp.  

=== PAGE 54 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
54 
 
 
6. P.H. Irace, K. Waddell, Z. Xu, D. Constales, P.B. Sunderland, R.L. Axelbaum, 
Microgravity Spherical Diffusion Flames: The Critical Point for Radiative Extinction 
and the Dynamics to Reach It, U.S. National Combustion Meeting (2021).  
7. K. Waddell, P.B. Sunderland, S. Medvedev, S. Frolov, P.H. Irace, R.L. Axelbaum, 
Flame and Burner Temperature Measurements and Predictions in Spherical 
Diffusion Flames, Abstract, ASGSR, Baltimore, 2021.  
 
L. Communication Imagery 
1. Still Imagery 
Photos are available online at www.flickr.com/photos/space-flames.  Although 
the Facebook page at www.facebook.com/space.flames is meant to provide 
updates on ACME and related combustion research, it is good source for recent 
photos, e.g., of flames, that may not be available on the Flickr site.   
 
Additional photographs may be requested from the Project Scientist, Dennis 
Stocker (dennis.p.stocker@nasa.gov). 
 
2. Video 
An example video from the Flame Design experiment can be found with the web-
based article at: 
https://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/station/research/news/combustion-
research-microgravity-clean-burning-fuel-space-station/. 
 
‘The Power of Studying Combustion on the ISS,’ which was developed with input 
from the ACME Project Scientist, is available at https://science.nasa.gov/science-
news/news-articles/the-power-of-studying-combustion-on-the-iss. 
 
Videos related to Flame Design and other microgravity combustion research can 
also be seen on Facebook at www.facebook.com/space.flames. 
  
Contact Dennis Stocker (dennis.p.stocker@nasa.gov) for access to those videos or 
for additional videos. 
 
 
IV. Additional Comments from science team 
Constantly sooting flames were only observed in 40% oxygen and high fuel concentrations.  In 
21% oxygen, small flames did not soot because of heat loss to the burner and large flames did 
not soot because high radiative losses caused the flame temperature to quickly drop below the 
sooting limit.  Preliminary analysis of the HiBMs images suggests that significant emission of light 
from soot particles and dissymmetry of the soot cloud will make acquiring accurate soot volume 
fraction measurements difficult, if possible. The cloud of soot particles also shows relatively 
extreme dissymmetry, further complicating our ability to obtain soot volume fraction 
measurements. 

=== PAGE 55 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
55 
 
 
Appendix D. Operational Timeline 
This summary timeline of key crew and remote operations was prepared by Dennis Stocker, where the red 
text indicates the key days when flames were ignited.  The dates were based on plans, where it is possible 
that the dates for some simple tasks, e.g., hardware gather or stowage, may have shifted slightly. 
 
The timeline also includes the launch and landing of crews who supported the Flame Design operations 
and more generally those of crews that occurred during Flame Design operations. 
 
First round (limited to normal flames) 
2018 
GMT 
Activity 
Dec. 3 
337 
Launch of Konenenko, McClain, and Saint-Jacques 
2019 
 
March 14 
073 
Launch of Hague, Koch, and Ovchinin 
April 5 
095 
Hardware gathered for Flame Design by Koch 
April 9 
099 
ACME chamber insert reconfigured for Flame Design by Koch 
April 10 
100 
Hardware stowed by Koch 
April 11 
101 
Bottle swaps by Kononenko 
April 22 
112 
MFC testing & tuning, etc. for start of Flame Design 
April 25 
115 
Flame Design tests using 100% C2H4 
May 3 
123 
Flame Design tests using 100% C2H4 
May 10 
130 
Igniter tip replacement by Saint-Jacques 
May 17 
137 
Flame Design tests using 100% C2H4 
May 20 
140 
Bottle swaps by Hague 
May 22 
142 
Flame Design tests using 100% C2H4 
May 30 
150 
Flame Design tests using 100% C2H4 
May 31 
151 
Swap of nitrogen Mass Flow Controller and bottle by Hague 
June 3 
154 
MFC testing & tuning 
June 5 
156 
Flame Design tests using 100% C2H4 
June 10 
161 
Flame Design tests using 100% C2H4 
June 13 
164 
Bottle swaps by Hague 
June 14 
165 
Hardware gather by Saint-Jacques; igniter tip replacement by Koch 
June 20 
171 
Flame Design tests using 100% C2H4 
June 24 
175 
Flame Design tests using 100% C2H4 
June 25  
176 
Landing of Konenenko, McClain, and Saint-Jacques 
June 28 
179 
Bottle swap by Koch 
July 1 
182 
Flame Design tests using 100% C2H4 
July 8 
189 
Flame Design tests using 100% C2H4 
July 11 
192 
Swap of nitrogen Mass Flow Controller and bottle by Koch 
July 15 
196 
Flame Design tests using 100% C2H4 
July 17 
198 
Igniter tip replacement by Hague 
July 19 
200 
Flame Design tests using 100% C2H4 
July 20 
201 
Launch of Morgan, Parmitano, and Skvortsov 
July 22 
203 
Bottle swap by Ovchinin (assisted by Koch) 
July 25 
206 
Flame Design tests using 100% C2H4 
2019 
GMT 
Activity 
Oct. 3 
277 
Landing of Hague, Ovchinin, and visiting astronaut Almansoori 

=== PAGE 56 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
56 
 
 
2020  
Feb. 6 
037 
Landing of Koch, Parmitano, and Skvortsov  
 
Second round (inverse flames except for the first day) 
2021 
April 9 
099 
Launch of Dubrov, Novitskiy, and Vande Hei 
April 23 
113 
Launch of Hoshide, Kimbrough, McArthur, and Pesquet 
Oct. 26 
299 
Bottle swap, etc. by Vande Hei 
Oct. 28 
301 
Flame Design tests in normal-flame mode using 100% C3H8 
Nov. 2 
306 
Chamber insert reconfiguration for inverse flame testing by Kimbrough 
Nov. 3 
307 
Chamber insert, etc. reconfiguration by Vande Hei; bottle swaps by McArthur 
Nov. 8 
312 
Landing of Hoshide, Kimbrough, McArthur, and Pesquet 
Nov. 10 
314 
Launch of Barron, Chari, Marshburn, and Maurer 
Nov. 22 
326 
Hardware checkout in preparation for inverse-flame testing 
Nov. 24 
328 
Flame Design tests in inverse-flame mode using 85% O2 
Dec. 3 
337 
Bottle swap by Dubrov (with Vande Hei’s assistance) 
Dec. 6 
340 
Flame Design tests in inverse-flame mode using 85% O2 
Dec. 10 
344 
Bottle swap by Vande Hei 
Dec. 15 
349 
Flame Design tests in inverse-flame mode using 85% O2 
Dec. 21 
355 
Bottle swaps by Chari 
Dec. 27 
361 
Flame Design tests in inverse-flame mode using 85% O2 
2022 
Jan. 5 
005 
Bottle swap by Vande Hei 
Jan. 17 
017 
Thin Filament Pyrometry (TFP) fiber array aligned, etc. by Chari 
Jan. 18 
018 
Flame Design tests in inverse-flame mode using 85% O2 
Jan. 24 
024 
Bottle swap by Dubrov; Flame Design tests using 85% O2 
Jan. 26 
026 
Bottle swaps by Dubrov 
Jan. 27 
027 
Flame Design tests in inverse-flame mode using 85% O2 
Jan. 31 
031 
Bottle swap by Dubrov 
Feb. 4 
035 
Flame Design tests in inverse-flame mode using 85% O2 
March 30 
089 
Landing of Dubrov, Shkaplerov, and Vande Hei 
May 6 
126 
Landing of Barron, Chari, Marshburn, and Maurer 
 
 
 
 

=== PAGE 57 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
57 
 
 
Appendix E. Astronauts who Conducted ISS Operations for Flame 
Design 
This list was prepared by Dennis Stocker from his log of ACME operations. 
 
The Flame Design experiment was supported by ten ISS crew members on 24 separate days, with 13 
occurring during the first round of operations and 11 in the second round.  The 8 men and 2 women are 
listed by the number of days in which they conducted supporting on-orbit activities and alphabetically. 
 
Crew member 
Year 
Day(s) of year 
# days 
Koch, Christina (NASA) 
2019 
095, 099-100, 165, 179, 192, 203 (with Ovchinin) 
7 
Vande Hei, Mark (NASA) 
2021 
299, 307, 337 (with Dubrov), 344 
5 
 
2022 
005 
Dubrov, Petr (RSA) 
2021 
337 
4 
 
2022 
024, 026, 031 
Hague, T. Nick (NASA) 
2019 
140, 151, 164, 198  
4 
Chari, Raja (NASA) 
2021 
355 
2 
 
2022 
017 
Saint-Jacques, David (CSA) 
2019 
130, 165 
2 
Kimbrough, Shane (NASA) 
2021 
306  
1 
Kononenko, Oleg (RSA) 
2019 
101 
1 
McArthur, K. Megan (NASA) 2021 
307 
1 
Ovchinin, Alexey (RSA) 
2019 
203 
1 
 
Together, the astronauts and cosmonauts represent three space agencies and three nations, namely 
Canada (CSA), Russia (RSA), and the United States (NASA). 
 
 
Agency 
# crew 
Crew members 
# days for agency 
 
NASA 
6 
Koch, Vande Hei, Hague, Chari, Kimbrough, McArthur 
19 
 
RSA 
3 
Dubrov, Kononenko, Ovchinin 
6 
 
CSA 
1 
Saint-Jacques 
2 
 
In the first round of testing, which featured normal flames, most of the crew tasks were carried out by 
Christina Koch (NASA), Nick Hague (NASA), and David Saint-Jacques (CSA).  In the second round, which 
featured inverse flames (except on the first test day), most crew tasks were conducted by Mark Vande 
Hei (NASA), Petr Dubrov (RSA), and Raja Chari (NASA). 
 
 
 
 

=== PAGE 58 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
58 
 
 
Appendix F. ISS Operations per the Payload Weekly Science Summary 
 
2019 
First round (normal flames) 
Increment 59/60 
Week 5: April 5-11 
This week, Christina Koch configured the ACME Chamber Insert to support the next ACME experiment, 
Flame Design. Also to support Flame Design, Oleg Kononenko replaced the bottles on CIR Manifold #2, 
CIR Manifold #4, and the CIR GC Helium Manifold. Flame Design is focused on understanding the soot 
processes of flames. Test points will start in a few weeks. 
 
The April 11 reporting on the completion of BRE’s first round was not included here.  
 
Week 8: April 26 – May 2 
On GMT 115, the first ACME Flame Design test points were performed. Pure gaseous ethylene fuel was 
ejected into air from a porous sphere, which, in microgravity, results in a one-dimensional, spherical 
flame. Thus, data analysis is greatly simplified because the flame shape doesn’t need to be predicted, and 
computational modeling can focus on the detailed chemistry and transport of the molecules and energy. 
 
The goal of Flame Design is to improve our understanding of soot processes so that flames can be 
“designed” to be soot free. This research could help lead to reduced soot and NOx—and thus reduced 
smog and acid rain—through nitrogen exchange, where the nitrogen is shifted from the air to the fuel. 
This oxygen-enriched combustion of diluted fuel could also facilitate carbon sequestration (i.e., capture 
and storage). 
 
 
Figure 1. Flame Design Flame (Example Preliminary Monochrome Image) 

=== PAGE 59 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
59 
 
 
As can be seen in Figure 1, the flame is nominally spherical, but heat loss to the burner tube causes it to 
locally quench. Similarly, candle flames have an open gap close to the candle, again due to heat loss. These 
non-premixed flames are a bit like bubbles, where the flame is the shell where the fuel and oxygen 
combine and create heat, light, and chemical products like carbon dioxide and water. In premixed flames, 
the fuel is within the “bubble” and the oxygen is outside of it. Future Flame Design tests are planned 
where the flame will be inside out, i.e., inverted. To conduct those tests (planned for 2020), the CIR's 
Combustion Chamber will be filled with a fuel/nitrogen mixture while an oxygen/nitrogen mixture will 
flow from the burner. 
 
Week 9: May 3-9 
On GMT 123, 19 spherical flames were successfully ignited for ACME Flame Design. Gaseous ethylene 
fuel, typically diluted with nitrogen, was ejected into air from the porous sphere at the end of the 
burner. Compared to the test points on GMT 115, these tests were conducted with higher flow rates, 
which resulted in larger flames of shorter durations. 
 
In most of the tests, the harp-like array of 14-micron ceramic fibers was translated into the flame to 
determine the radial temperature distribution. Where a fiber is visibly glowing, the temperature can be 
determined from its color, where yellow is hotter than orange, which in turn is hotter than red. The 
ACME color camera was carefully characterized prior to launch enabling a quantitative determination of 
the temperature by comparison of the red, green, and blue color planes in a measurement technique 
referred to as pyrometry.  
 
Unfortunately, during the day’s final test point, the igniter tip burned out and will need to be replaced 
before performing more test points. 
 

=== PAGE 60 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
60 
 
 
 
This sequence of preliminary monochrome flame images is a life history of an example Flame Design 
flame. 
(a) Shortly after ignition, the ignition-created soot is being carried out of the flame by the gas flow from 
the porous spherical burner. 
(b) The amount of soot has decreased dramatically and the blue flame (neglecting the bright spots of the 
soot particulate) has expanded and dimmed. Since the fuel is inside the flame and oxygen is outside, the 
flame expands outward until it reaches enough oxygen to consume the fuel. The gas flow is outward from 
the burner sphere, so the oxygen must diffuse inward due to its concentration gradient. That gradient, 
and thus the oxygen transport, diminishes (i.e., flattens) with time due to both the oxygen consumption 
and the release of combustion byproducts like carbon dioxide and water vapor. A flame becomes 
effectively blanketed by these byproducts, inhibiting the oxygen transport. 
(c) The visible soot has mostly disappeared, and the flame has further grown and dimmed. The base of 
the flame has retreated from the burner tube because of heat loss. 
(d) The fiber array has begun translating with the first ceramic fiber at the edge of flame, where its glow 
is visible at the top of the image. Again, the soot continued to disappear, and the flame continued to grow 
and retreat from the burner tube. 
(e) Two fibers are in the flame and the third is close enough to visibly glow. The flame is a shell, where the 
fibers are cooler (i.e., dimmer in this gray-scale image) within the flame. A comparison of images (d) and 
(e) reveals that the flame base is oscillating, which is a sign of approaching extinction. 
(f) The flame has nearly extinguished due to radiative heat loss and is very faint in comparison to the 
earlier images. The fibers are dimmer in image (f) than (e), indicating the decrease in flame temperature. 

=== PAGE 61 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
61 
 
 
Week 10: May 10-16 
On GMT 130, David Saint-Jacques replaced the burnt-out ACME Igniter Tip. He also installed the ACME 
Short Thermocouple Array, which will measure temperatures near the flame. ACME returned to 
performing Flame Design test points on GMT 137. 
 
Week 11: May 17-23 
On GMT 137 and 142, ACME Flame Design test points were performed in chamber environments of 
varying oxygen concentrations, including 21%, 30% and 40% oxygen (the remainder was nitrogen). The 
test points used gaseous ethylene fuel, which was sometimes diluted with nitrogen. 
 
On GMT 140, Nick Hague replaced the bottles on CIR Manifold #2 and the CIR GC Argon Manifold to 
support Flame Design test points. 
 
CAPTION TO VIDEO, WHICH IS NOT INCLUDED IN THIS LOG 
This test point video first runs at normal speed, and then the end of it runs a second time at 
quarter speed to better show what is happening with the flame. This test point was performed in 
a chamber environment of air (21% oxygen/79% nitrogen). The flame almost completely 
extinguishes but then dramatically flashes back reestablishing the spherical flame before finally 
extinguishing. The asymmetry of this test’s flashback makes the flame’s death even more 
dramatic. The flame is brighter as it flashes back due to the added mixing of the oxygen and fuel 
that occurs where the flame has partially quenched. 
 
Week 13: May 31 - June 6 
On GMT 150, ACME Flame Design test points were performed in chamber environments ranging from 29-
40% oxygen (the remainder was nitrogen). The test points used gaseous ethylene fuel, which was 
sometimes diluted with nitrogen. These flames were more robust and were often relatively stable in 
comparison to the earlier tests that had been conducted in ~21% oxygen. 
 
On GMT 151, Nick Hague replaced the ACME Bypass Controller and the CIR Manifold #2 Bottle to support 
Flame Design test points with faster nitrogen flow rates and in oxygen concentrations up to 40%. 
 
 
This figure shows a dim blue spherical flame with glowing soot that was created at ignition. 

=== PAGE 62 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
62 
 
 
Week 14: June 7-13 
On GMT 156, ACME Flame Design test conditions resulted in flames which continued to produce soot 
following ignition, yielding new information for this study of soot processes. While soot is both an 
environmental and health concern, it can be useful for some applications. As two examples, soot is helpful 
for radiant heat transfer and for illumination. The purpose of Flame Design is to determine the conditions 
controlling the presence or absence of soot in non-premixed flames (i.e., where the fuel and oxygen are 
separated by the flame’s surface). With that understanding, engineers will be able to “design” flames that 
are either sooty or not depending on their needs. 
 
CAPTION TO VIDEO, WHICH IS NOT INCLUDED IN THIS LOG 
In this test point video, pure ethylene (C2H4), which is a sooty fuel due to its double bond, was 
burned in roughly 36% oxygen (with a balance of nitrogen). At ignition, the flame is very sooty. 
The broadband thermal radiation of the soot particles causes the bright yellow color of the flame. 
The fuel flow rate is then ramped up to more than twice the flow rate at ignition, where the flame 
grows larger as a result. The test conditions are such that the flame temperature is high enough 
to continue to produce soot particles, which are mostly carbon and form when the ethylene 
within the flame is hot enough to react with itself in the absence of oxygen (which is outside of 
the flame). But the flame later weakens as the oxygen transport drops and the radiative heat 
losses become important. The flame appears to no longer produce soot near the flame’s end, but 
the glowing soot clusters are still apparent. With the long residence time resulting from the 
microgravity condition, the clusters become especially large. 
 
 
 
Week 15: June 14-20 
On GMT 164, Nick Hague replaced the bottles on the CIR Manifold #2 and the CIR Check Gas Manifold to 
continue supporting ACME Flame Design test points. 
 
Also, in support of Flame Design test points, Christina Koch replaced the ACME Igniter Tip and the ACME 
Spherical Burner on GMT 165. ACME returned to performing test points on GMT 171. 
 
Week 16: June 21-27 
On GMT 171 and 175, ACME Flame Design test points were performed with the new spherical burner that 
was installed on GMT 165. This particular spherical burner is markedly better at achieving a spherical 
flame than the last spherical burner. With a spherical flame, data analysis is greatly simplified because the 
flame shape doesn’t need to be predicted, and computational modeling can focus on the detailed 
chemistry and transport of the molecules and energy. 
 
These tests were conducted in atmospheres of up to 40% oxygen and using gaseous ethylene fuel, which 
was sometimes diluted with nitrogen. The GMT 175 tests were conducted at slightly elevated pressures 
furthering this experiment’s goal to understand the conditions that lead to sooty and soot-free flames. 
 

=== PAGE 63 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
63 
 
 
 
While Flame Design’s primary objective is to determine the conditions under which flames are soot-free 
or soot producing, a secondary objective is to establish flammability limits for these spherical flames. We 
have observed interesting phenomena where the flames sometimes self-extinguish after growing 
oscillations. These oscillations are apparent in the above graph, which shows the chemiluminescence from 
excited molecules that drop to a lower energy state by emitting a photon at a specific wavelength. CH* 
chemiluminescence is the source of most of the blue seen in hydrocarbon flames and OH* 
chemiluminescence is in the ultraviolet. These two measurements are made with Photomultipiler Tubes 
(PMTs), where each tube is equipped with a narrow-band filter corresponding to an excited molecule. 
 
In the example shown in the graph, the flame’s oscillations lasted about 30 seconds and occurred at 
roughly 1 Hz, but they slowed in frequency as they grew in strength. The oscillations are evident in the 
imaging, where the flame locally quenches—creating a hole in the flame. This hole allows for increased 
mixing of the fuel and oxygen, which in turn results in a recovery of the flame. The size of the opening in 
the flame (which normally separates the fuel and oxygen) grows with time until the entire flame 
extinguishes. 
 
Interestingly, the graph shows that the CH* measurement was relatively steady before the start of the 
oscillations in comparison with the decaying OH* emission. This difference will be further examined to 
improve our understanding of flame extinction. 
 
 
 

=== PAGE 64 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
64 
 
 
Week 17: June 28 – July 4 
On GMT 179, Christina Koch replaced the CIR Manifold #2 Bottle to continue supporting ACME Flame 
Design test points. 
 
On GMT 182, 15 spherical flames were successfully ignited for ACME Flame Design. The goal of Flame 
Design is to improve our understanding of soot processes so that flames can be “designed” to be soot 
free. 
 
Week 18: July 5-11 
On GMT 189, ACME Flame Design test points were performed using diluted ethylene fuel at a chamber 
pressure of 1.3 atm with varying oxygen concentrations of 34 to 40% oxygen (the remainder was 
nitrogen). The elevated oxygen and pressure can enhance the production of soot, where this research is 
focused on understanding the conditions that lead to sooty and soot-free flames. 
 
On GMT 192, Christina Koch replaced the ACME Bypass Controller and the CIR Manifold #2 Bottle to 
support Flame Design test points with slower nitrogen flow rates and in oxygen concentrations of up to 
40%. 
 
CAPTION TO VIDEO, WHICH IS NOT INCLUDED IN THIS LOG 
This test point video shows a sooty flame, and, in the absence of buoyancy, the soot stays within 
the flame and clusters. Some of the glowing soot clusters move out of the flame due to the 
outward flow of the diluted ethylene fuel through the burner’s porous sphere. In contrast, some 
of the clusters get trapped within the flame due to a temperature gradient that moves them 
inward toward the cold burner and away from the hot flame. 
 
After some time, the harp-like array of 14-micron ceramic fibers is translated into the flame to 
determine the radial temperature distribution. Using a carefully characterized camera, the 
temperature can be quantitatively determined from a glowing fiber’s color, where yellow is hotter 
than orange, and orange is hotter than red. The motion of the fiber arm causes the soot clusters 
to move away from the fibers.  
 
While the temperature measurements are being made, the flow of diluted ethylene is gradually 
reduced, which causes the flame to become smaller and unstable. Heat loss causes the flame to 
locally quench—creating a hole in the flame near the burner tube. This hole allows for increased 
mixing of the fuel and oxygen, which reinvigorates the flame and causes it to close again. The 
flame opens and closes, effectively consuming fuel in repeated gulps…a bit like a video-game 
character eating dots. But as the fuel flow is reduced further, the size of the open “mouth” gets 
smaller, as if the flame is becoming full. The flame becomes stable again until the flow becomes 
so small that the flame finally goes out. 
 
This video illustrates the extreme complexities of even conceptually simple flames! Even though 
mankind has been using combustion for millennia, microgravity research can unlock new 
understanding, which would lead to improved efficiency and reduced pollutant emission in 
practical terrestrial combustion. 
 
 
 

=== PAGE 65 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
65 
 
 
Week 19: July 12-18 
On GMT 196, ACME Flame Design test points were performed using ethylene fuel (sometimes diluted) at 
a chamber pressure of 1.25 atm in about 40% oxygen (the remainder was nitrogen). Today’s tests focused 
primarily on quasi-steady flames (where the flame radius remains essentially constant in time) and 
determining flame temperatures near the point where soot disappears. At the end of the day, the igniter 
tip burned out. On GMT 198, Nick Hague replaced the burnt-out igniter tip. 
 
CAPTION TO VIDEO, WHICH IS NOT INCLUDED IN THIS LOG 
Upon ignition, the flame in this test point video exhibits a lot of soot, which is bright whitish-
yellow in appearance. This extreme brightness masks the blue flame, which is the marker of the 
fuel oxidation region. With time, the soot diminishes, and the blue flame becomes more visible. 
The harp-like array of 14-micron ceramic fibers then slowly traverses in and out of the flame. The 
glow from the fibers allows for a good estimation of the local temperature. 
 
Week 20: July 19-25 
On GMT 200, ACME Flame Design test points were performed using ethylene fuel (sometimes diluted) at 
a chamber pressure of 1 atm in about 40% or 30% oxygen (the remainder was nitrogen). Today’s tests 
studied quasi-steady flames and took flame temperature measurements using the ceramic fiber array. 
These tests were the last Flame Design tests to be performed in higher oxygen atmospheres.  
 
On GMT 203, Alexey Ovchinin and Christina Koch replaced the CIR Manifold #2 Bottle to support Flame 
Design test points. 
 
Week 21: July 26 – August 1 
On GMT 206, we performed the final test points for the first round of testing for ACME Flame Design. Test 
points were performed using ethylene fuel (sometimes diluted) in a chamber environment of air (21% 
oxygen, 79% nitrogen at 1 atm). The flames for these tests were short-lived and non-sooty—unlike the 
flames from the tests at higher oxygen concentrations. The goal of Flame Design is to improve our 
understanding of soot processes so that flames can be “designed” to be soot free. 
 
To prepare for the start of ACME s-Flame (Structure and Response of Spherical Diffusion Flames), Christina 
Koch replaced the bottles on CIR Manifolds #2 and #4 on GMT 211. While monitoring the bottle pressures, 
it was noted that the pressure of the bottle at Manifold #4 was slowly decreasing. The rack was powered 
down, and Nick Hague and Luca Parmitano both helped with troubleshooting operations. Currently, a 
forward plan is being developed. 
 
2021 
Second round (inverse flames expect for the first test day) 
Increment 66 
Week 2: Oct. 22-28 
Last week, Shane Kimbrough replaced the gas bottles at CIR Manifold #2 and CIR Manifold #4, configured 
the gas bottle valves, and set the valve timer switches in CIR. These activities allowed us to perform the 
calibration of the CIR’s FOMA (Fuel/Oxidizer Management Assembly) system. This calibration needs to be 
completed yearly to ensure that all the pressure transducers in the CIR are accurate. On GMT 299, Mark 
Vande Hei reset the valve timer switches, closed the bottle valve at CIR Manifold #1, and replaced the gas 

=== PAGE 66 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
66 
 
 
bottle at CIR Manifold #4 to prepare for calibration test points for the next ACME experiment, Flame 
Design Part 2. 
 
Week 3: Oct. 29 – Nov. 4 
On GMT 301, we began the second round of testing for ACME Flame Design with 18 normal flames ignited 
using propane fuel. The goal of Flame Design is to improve our understanding of soot processes so that 
flames can be “designed” to be soot free. The remaining tests will look at inverse flames, which are formed 
when diluted oxygen flows from the burner into a Combustion Chamber filled with diluted fuel. Compared 
to normal flames, inverse flames are inside out so soot is formed outside rather than inside the flame. 
While soot processes are known to depend on flame temperature and the residence time of the fuel at 
high temperatures, a comparison of normal- and inverse-flame results will help us better understand the 
impact of flow direction on soot processes. On GMT 306 and 307, Shane Kimbrough, Megan McArthur 
and Mark Vande Hei configured the ACME Chamber Insert and replaced the gas bottles at CIR Manifold 
#2 and CIR Manifold #4 to support the inverse flame tests for Flame Design Part 2. 
 
 
Figure 1. Flame Design Normal Propane Flame 
 
This false-colored image of a soot-free spherical flame shows an array of 14-micron ceramic fibers making 
temperature measurements. The blue in the image has been enhanced so that the dim flame is visible in 
addition to the fibers. Normally, the hot fibers appear to be red, orange, and yellow—in order of increasing 
temperature—just like metal in a forge. The temperature profile along each fiber is optically determined 
from its varying hue through a technique known as Thin Filament Pyrometry (TFP). 
 
The base of the flame has locally quenched due to heat loss to the burner’s supply tube, which created a 
hole in the flame. This hole allowed for direct mixing of the fuel and oxygen, which enhanced flammability 
and causes the flame to momentarily reform. In this test, the spherical flame repeatedly opened and 
closed with oscillations that grew in strength until the entire flame extinguished. 

=== PAGE 67 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
67 
 
 
 
Week 7: Nov. 26 – Dec. 2 
On GMT 328, we ignited nine inverse flames for ACME Flame Design. For these tests, an oxygen/nitrogen 
mixture flowed from the burner into a combustion chamber, which was filled with an ethylene/nitrogen 
mixture. For one of these tests, we observed our longest sustained flame, which burned for over 14 
minutes. At that time, operational constraints required its termination. For comparison, flame durations 
for all ACME experiments are typically shorter than two minutes with the longest—until now—under six 
minutes. This 14+ minute flame has led to new understanding of the stability of spherical flames. 
 
While test measurements did show that this long-duration flame was slowly weakening with time, it might 
have burned significantly longer. We have found with higher burner flow rates that flames grow with time 
and extinguish due to radiative heat loss. If the flow rate is too low, the flame’s small size leads to excessive 
burner heating. But under the right conditions, the flame can burn for minutes and perhaps even tens of 
minutes. 
 
 
Figure 1. Flame Design Long-Duration Inverse Flame 
 
This false-colored image was taken about halfway through the 14+ minute test. The blue in the image has 
been enhanced so that the dim flame is visible in addition to the ceramic fiber, which is glowing at the top 
of the flame. We use the fibers for optical determination of the flame’s temperature. 
 
Week 9: Dec. 10-16 
On GMT 337, Petr Dubrov and Mark Vande Hei replaced the gas bottle at CIR Manifold #4 to support 
continuation of Flame Design test points. On GMT 340 and 349, we ignited 28 inverse flames for ACME 
Flame Design. For these tests, we filled a combustion chamber with a mixture of nitrogen and gaseous 
fuel (ethylene) and then flowed a mixture of nitrogen and oxygen from the burner. For both test days, the 
primary test parameters included varying the oxygen concentration and flow rate from the burner. 

=== PAGE 68 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
68 
 
 
Another parameter on GMT 340 was varying the ethylene concentration; while on GMT 349, we varied 
the chamber pressure instead. On GMT 340, we used the ceramic fibers for measuring flame temperature; 
whereas on GMT 349, we focused on determining sooting limits to better understand the conditions 
which cause soot to form or not. On GMT 347, Mark Vande Hei replaced the gas bottle at CIR Manifold #4 
to support continuation of Flame Design test points. 
 
CAPTION TO VIDEO, WHICH IS NOT INCLUDED IN THIS LOG 
In this test point video, we translated the 14-micron ceramic fibers into the flame to optically 
measure the temperature through a technique known as Thin Filament Pyrometry (TFP). The color 
of the fiber’s glow is indicative of the temperature, where yellow is hotter than orange, which in 
turn is hotter than red. Due to excessive radiative heat loss, this large flame locally quenches and 
retreats from the burner supply tube (right-hand side). This hole allows the fuel and oxygen to 
directly mix, which enhances flammability and causes the hole to momentarily close. The cycle of 
partial quenching and recovery repeats with the oscillations growing in strength until the flame 
completely extinguishes. 
 
Week 10: Dec. 17-23 
On GMT 355, Raja Chari replaced the gas bottles at CIR Manifold #2 and CIR Manifold #4 to support 
continuation of Flame Design test points. 
 
Week 11: Dec. 24-30 
On GMT 361, we ignited 20 inverse flames for ACME Flame Design. We performed these tests with two 
different ethylene concentrations with a range of oxidizer concentrations and flow rates from the burner. 
The purpose of these tests was to determine at what conditions soot starts forming and to make detailed 
measurements of the flame at quasi-steady conditions (i.e., changes are occurring at such a slow rate that 
the flame can be considered constant). 
 
 
Figure 1. Effects of Oxidizer Flow Rate on Flame Design Inverse Flames 
 

=== PAGE 69 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
69 
 
 
This composite image shows the effects of the oxidizer flow rate on inverse flames. In these tests, we 
varied the oxidizer flow rate from the burner while the concentrations of oxidizer and fuel in the 
chamber atmosphere were the same. These images were taken late in each test after the soot had 
dissipated. The higher flow rate resulted in a larger flame. However, a flame's radiative heat loss 
increases with its size, so the larger flame was dimmer. This image is false colored making the flame 
appear blue and the porous spherical burner appear red. 
 
Week 12: Dec. 31 – Jan. 6 
On GMT 005, Mark Vande Hei replaced the gas bottle at CIR Manifold #4 to support continuation of 
Flame Design test points. 
 
2022 
Week 14: Jan. 14-20 
On GMT 017, Raja Chari configured the ACME Chamber Insert to support the remaining ACME Flame 
Design test points. On GMT 018, we ignited 12 inverse flames for Flame Design. We performed these 
tests with two different ethylene concentrations in a range of oxidizer concentrations and flow rates 
from the burner. The purpose of these tests was to use the ceramic fibers for measuring flame 
temperature and to study flames that oscillate prior to quenching. In one test, the oscillations continued 
for nearly 3 minutes before the flame quenched. 
 
Figure 1. Effect of Oxidizer Flow Rate on Oscillatory Quenching of Flame Design Inverse Flames 
 
Figure 1 is a preliminary graph of the oscillatory quenching of three inverse flames as a function of oxidizer 
flow rate. The measurement shown on the y-axis is of ultraviolet light from the molecule OH*, which 
transiently occurs in combustion. This light is a good indicator of flame stability.  
 
The flame images show that higher oxidizer flow rates lead to larger flames, but larger flames experience 
greater radiative heat loss. So, these larger flames quench more quickly and with fewer oscillations. The 

=== PAGE 70 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
70 
 
 
graph shows the largest flame with the highest flow rate (red) quenched after less than 10 seconds of 
oscillating; whereas, the smallest flame with half the flow rate (blue) oscillated for almost 40 seconds 
before quenching. 
 
Week 15: Jan. 21-27 
On GMT 024 and 026, Pyotr Dubrov replaced the gas bottles at CIR Manifold #2 and CIR Manifold #4 to 
support continuation of ACME Flame Design test points. On GMT 024, we ignited 20 inverse flames for 
Flame Design. We performed these tests with ethylene fuel in a range of oxidizer concentrations and flow 
rates from the burner. These tests were performed at two different chamber pressures. While pressure 
has a secondary effect on flames compared to the concentration of the reactants, its effect is still 
important and noticeable. 
 
 
Figure 1. Effect of Pressure on Flame Design Inverse Flames 
 
This composite image shows the effect of chamber pressure on inverse flames. Although the pressure 
didn't greatly affect the size of the flames, it still had a significant effect. The flame at lower pressure is 
much brighter because at higher pressures light-emitting molecules are more likely to be extinguished 
due to molecular collisions. Also, the low-pressure flame shows subtle signs of soot formation. At the top 
of the flame, the blue edge is tinted with yellow due to soot, which also creates a haze just above the 
flame. Inverse flames are inside out, where the soot is formed outside of the flame when the hot fuel 
combines with itself in the absence of oxygen (which is inside the flame). The porous spherical burner is 
illuminated in red from the illumination package we sometimes use during imaging. 
 
Week 16: Jan. 28 – Feb. 3 
On GMT 027, we ignited 16 inverse flames for ACME Flame Design. We performed these tests in a 
combustion chamber filled with an ethylene/nitrogen mixture to a pressure of 3 atm. We plan to compare 
these tests to earlier ones performed at lower pressures. During all tests, the 14-micron ceramic fibers 
were translated into the flame to optically measure the flame temperature through a technique known 

=== PAGE 71 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
71 
 
 
as Thin Filament Pyrometry (TFP). On GMT 031, Pyotr Dubrov replaced the gas bottles at CIR Manifold #4 
to support continuation of Flame Design test points. 
 
 
Figure 1. Temperature Measurement of a Flame Design Inverse Flame 
 
In this false-colored image, one 14-micron ceramic fiber was inserted into the flame where a second fiber 
is visible just above. Both fibers are hot enough to visibly glow, where the temperature can be 
quantitatively determined from their hue using a camera characterized for that purpose. The flame 
temperature is determined from where the fiber passes through the flame shell and glows most brightly. 
 
Week 17: Feb. 4-10 
On GMT 035, we performed the final test points for the second round of testing for ACME Flame Design. 
We ignited 15 inverse flames. For these tests, we filled a combustion chamber with ethylene/nitrogen 
mixtures and then flowed a mixture of oxygen/nitrogen from the burner. Tests were conducted at both 
elevated and reduced pressures. The spherical symmetry of the flames, resulting from the absence of 
buoyant flows created by Earth's gravity, simplifies data analysis and can lead to new understanding. 
 
These were our final test points with ACME, which has been successfully performing science in CIR since 
2017! 
 
 
Figure 1. Time Sequence of the Final Flame Design Inverse Flame 

=== PAGE 72 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
72 
 
 
Figure 1 shows the inverse spherical flame growing with time to reach enough fuel to consume the oxygen 
flowing from the porous spherical burner. As the flame grew bigger, the radiative heat loss increased, 
which caused the flame to weaken and become dimmer. The flame's temperature dropped, which is 
indicated by the hue of the glowing ceramic fibers, where yellow is hotter than orange, which in turn is 
hotter than red. 
 
 

=== PAGE 73 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
73 
 
 
Appendix G. Crew Activity per Space Station Science Highlights  
The subsequent text and images are from the weekly highlights prepared by the Lead Increment Scientist 
and made available via e-mail and online via www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/station/research/.   
 
With the major exception of the Space Station Science Highlights, links were generally not included in the 
excerpts herein because they typically go to secondary sources of information for the ACME project, for 
which the primary web site is https://www1.grc.nasa.gov/space/iss-research/iss-fcf/cir/acme/.  
Clarifications have been added in red. 
 
2019 
First round (normal flames) 
Week of April 1, 2019 
Other investigations on which the crew performed work: 
• 
The Combustion Integrated Rack (CIR) includes an optics bench, combustion chamber, fuel and 
oxidizer control, and five different cameras for performing combustion investigations in 
microgravity.   
 
Week of April 8, 2019 
Other investigations on which the crew performed work: 
• 
The Combustion Integrated Rack (CIR) includes an optics bench, combustion chamber, fuel and 
oxidizer control, and five different cameras for performing combustion investigations in 
microgravity.   
 
 
NASA astronaut Nick Hague replaced an igniter in the Advanced Combustion via Microgravity Experiment 
(ACME), a set of six studies of gaseous flames conducted in the Combustion Integrated Rack (CIR). The CIR 
includes an optics bench, combustion chamber, fuel and oxidizer control, and five different cameras for 
performing combustion experiments in microgravity. 
Credits: NASA 
While Hague did support Flame Design operations, this photo is from April 3 work in support of ACME’s 
Burning Rate Emulator (BRE) experiment.  That study’s final test day was on April 4, while Christina Koch 
began Flame Design preparations on April 5. 

=== PAGE 74 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
74 
 
 
 
Week of April 15, 2019 
Other investigations on which the crew performed work: 
• 
The Combustion Integrated Rack (CIR) includes an optics bench, combustion chamber, fuel and 
oxidizer control, and five different cameras for performing combustion investigations in 
microgravity.   
 
Week of July 15, 2019 
Cleaner combustion 
The crew completed final runs for the Advanced Combustion via Microgravity Experiments (ACME) Flame 
Design, which studies the production and control of soot to optimize oxygen-enriched combustion and 
the design of robust, soot-free flames. Soot can adversely affect efficiency, emissions, and equipment 
lifetime. Flame Design is part of a series of independent ACME experiments using the space station’s 
Combustion Integrated Rack (CIR). 
 
Week of July 22, 2019 
Other investigations on which the crew performed work: 
• 
ACME Flame Design, which studies the production and control of soot to optimize oxygen-
enriched combustion and the design of robust, soot-free flames, is part of a series of independent 
ACME experiments using the space station’s Combustion Integrated Rack (CIR). 
 
 
NASA astronaut Nick Hague services the Combustion Integrated Rack (CIR), which supports safe flame and 
fuel research with potential benefit for fire safety on Earth and in space as well as applications in the 
design of advanced combustion systems for spacecraft and Earth-bound vehicles. 
Credits: NASA 
Flame Design, and the ACME project of which it was a part, is generally focused on practical terrestrial 
combustion and it is not specifically focused on combustion for vehicles.  None of the ACME 
investigations were directed toward combustion systems for spacecraft, and improved fire safety was 
the primary goal of only one of ACME’s studies, the BRE experiment, where its focus was specific to 
spacecraft. 

=== PAGE 75 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
75 
 
 
Week of July 29, 2019 
Other investigations on which the crew performed work: 
• 
ACME Flame Design, which studies the production and control of soot to optimize oxygen-
enriched combustion and the design of robust, soot-free flames, is part of a series of independent 
ACME experiments using the space station’s Combustion Integrated Rack (CIR). 
While the crew did work on ACME during this week, it was for the s-Flame experiment.  First-round 
operations for Flame Design ended on July 26.  
 
Week of August 5, 2019 
Other investigations on which the crew performed work: 
• 
ACME Flame Design, which studies the production and control of soot to optimize oxygen-
enriched combustion and the design of robust, soot-free flames, is part of a series of independent 
ACME experiments using the space station’s Combustion Integrated Rack (CIR). 
While the crew did work on ACME during this week, it was for the s-Flame experiment.  First-round 
operations for Flame Design ended on July 26.  
 
2021 
Second round (inverse flames expect for the first test day) 
Week of October 25, 2021 
Other investigations involving the crew: 
• 
Flame Design studies the production and control of soot, which can adversely affect combustion 
efficiency, emissions, and equipment lifetime. Part of the ACME series of studies, this 
investigation could lead to more efficient and cleaner burner designs. 
 
Week of November 1, 2021 
Other investigations involving the crew: 
• 
Flame Design studies the production and control of soot, which can adversely affect combustion 
efficiency, emissions, and equipment lifetime. Part of the ACME series of studies, this 
investigation could lead to more efficient and cleaner burner designs. 
 
Week of December 13, 2021 
Better burning 
The crew replaced fuel bottles in support of the on-going Flame Design investigation, which studies the 
production and control of soot in oxygen-enriched combustion and the design of soot-free flames. Soot 
can adversely affect efficiency, emissions, and equipment lifetime, so this research may lead to cleaner 
and more efficient burner designs for combustion applications on Earth. Findings also could aid the 
development of future space-based combustion devices for tasks such as solid waste processing or to 
improve spacecraft fire safety. The experiment is conducted with spherical flames of gaseous fuels in the 
Combustion Integrated Rack (CIR) as part of the Advanced Combustion via Microgravity Experiments 
(ACME) project. 
 

=== PAGE 76 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
76 
 
 
 
Set-up for the ACME Flame Design experiment, which studies the production and control of soot-free 
flames in an effort to create more efficient and cleaner burner designs for combustion applications on 
Earth and in space. 
Credits: NASA 
 
Week of December 20, 2021 
Other investigations involving the crew: 
• 
Flame Design studies the production and control of soot in oxygen-enriched combustion and the 
design of soot-free flames. This research may lead to cleaner and more efficient burner designs 
for combustion applications on Earth and aid the development of future space-based combustion 
devices for tasks such as solid waste processing or to improve spacecraft fire safety. 
 
Week of January 17, 2022 
Other investigations involving the crew: 
• 
Flame Design, part of the ACME series of payloads, studies the production and control of soot in 
oxygen-enriched combustion and the design of soot-free flames. This research may lead to 
cleaner and more efficient burner designs for combustion applications on Earth and aid the 
development of future space-based combustion devices for tasks such as solid waste processing 
or to improve spacecraft fire safety. 
 
Week of January 24, 2022 
Other investigations involving the crew: 
• 
Flame Design, part of the ACME series of payloads, studies the production and control of soot in 
oxygen-enriched combustion and the design of soot-free flames. This research may lead to 
cleaner and more efficient burner designs for combustion applications on Earth and aid the 
development of future space-based combustion devices for tasks such as solid waste processing 
or to improve spacecraft fire safety. 

=== PAGE 77 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
77 
 
 
Appendix H. Crew Activity per the ISS Daily Summary Report 
This appendix was compiled from https://blogs.nasa.gov/stationreport.  Headings were added identifying 
the investigation’s two rounds of testing, but Flame Design operations listed under the headings such as 
“All activities are complete unless otherwise noted” or “Completed Task List Activities” were not included 
in this report.  Some days of crew activity were only listed in those ways and as a result this section does 
not comprehensively document crew activity in support of the Flame Design experiment.  Clarifications 
can be found in red. 
 
First round (normal flames) 
2019 
 
2019 April 9: GMT 099 
Combustion Integration Rack (CIR)/Advanced Combustion via Microgravity Experiments (ACME) 
Hardware Replacement:  The crew changed the CIR/ACME system from the BRE (Burning Rate Emulator) 
experiment configuration to the Flame Design experiment configuration. The Flame Design investigation 
studies the production and control of soot to optimize oxygen-enriched combustion and the design of 
robust, soot-free flames. Soot can adversely affect efficiency, emissions, and equipment lifetime, so this 
may lead to more efficient and cleaner burner designs. The experiment is conducted with spherical flames 
of gaseous fuels in the CIR as part of the Advanced ACME project. Flame Design is one of five experiments 
hosted by CIR/ACME. 
ACME has six experiments when including the Cool Flames Investigation with Gases (CFI-G), which was 
selected for spaceflight by the Center for Advancement of Science in Space (CASIS) and National Science 
Foundation (NSF) rather than NASA. 
 
2019 May 10: GMT 130 
Combustion Integration Rack (CIR)/Advanced Combustion via Microgravity Experiments (ACME):  The 
crew replaced the ACME Igniter Tip and installed the ACME Short Thermocouple Array, which will allow 
the continuation of the ACME/Flame Design investigation. The Flame Design investigation studies the 
production and control of soot to optimize oxygen-enriched combustion and the design of robust, soot-
free flames. Soot can adversely affect efficiency, emissions, and equipment lifetime, so this may lead to 
more efficient and cleaner burner designs. The experiment is conducted with spherical flames of gaseous 
fuels in the CIR as part of the ACME project.  Flame Design is one of five experiments hosted by CIR/ACME.  
ACME has six experiments when including the Cool Flames Investigation with Gases (CFI-G). 
 
2019 May 31: GMT 151 
CIR (Combustion Integrated Rack): The crew replaced the CIR ACME (Advanced Combustion via 
Microgravity Experiments) controller and replaced the manifold-2 O2 and N2 bottles. The CIR includes an 
optics bench, combustion chamber, fuel and oxidizer control, and five different cameras for performing 
combustion experiments in microgravity. 
ACME has six experiments when including the Cool Flames Investigation with Gases (CFI-G). 
 
2019 June 14: GMT 165 
CIR (Combustion Integration Rack)/ACME (Advanced Combustion via Microgravity Experiments)/Flame 
Design hardware replacement:  The crew opened the CIR rack doors, opened the CIR combustion 
chamber front end cap, and removed the ACME chamber insert to replace the burned out igniter tip. The 

=== PAGE 78 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
78 
 
 
CIR team also took this opportunity to replace the burner head, since the current burner head seems to 
be having difficulty producing gas flows which encourage a spherical flame.  The on-going Flame Design 
investigation studies the production and control of soot in to optimize oxygen-enriched combustion and 
the design of robust, soot-free flames. Soot can adversely affect efficiency, emissions, and equipment 
lifetime, so this may lead to more efficient and cleaner burner designs. The experiment is conducted with 
spherical flames of gaseous fuels in the CIR as part of the ACME project.  Flame Design is one of five 
experiments hosted by CIR/ACME. 
ACME has six experiments when including the Cool Flames Investigation with Gases (CFI-G). 
 
2019 July 11: GMT 192 
Combustion Integration Rack/Advanced Combustion via Microgravity Experiments (CIR/ACME): The 
crew exchanged the mass flow controller and manifold gas bottle.  The different flow controllers allow 
the ACME experimenters to study combustion under different gas flow regimes. The currently on-going 
Flame Design investigation studies the production and control of soot in order to optimize oxygen-
enriched combustion and the design of robust, soot-free flames. Soot can adversely affect efficiency, 
emissions, and equipment lifetime, so this may lead to more efficient and cleaner burner designs. The 
experiment is conducted with spherical flames of gaseous fuels in the CIR as part of the ACME project.  
Flame Design is one of five experiments hosted by CIR/ACME.   
ACME has six experiments when including the Cool Flames Investigation with Gases (CFI-G). 
 
2019 July 17: GMT 198 
Combustion Integration Rack (CIR)/Advanced Combustion via Microgravity Experiments (ACME) /Flame 
Design: The crew replaced the igniter tip which burned out this week to complete the final Flame Design 
runs. The investigation studies the production and control of soot to optimize oxygen-enriched 
combustion and the design of robust, soot-free flames. Soot can adversely affect efficiency, emissions, 
and equipment lifetime, so this may lead to more efficient and cleaner burner designs. The experiment is 
conducted with spherical flames of gaseous fuels in the CIR as part of the ACME project. 
 
2019 July 22: GMT 203 
Combustion Integration Rack (CIR)/Advanced Combustion via Microgravity Experiments (ACME)/Flame 
Design: The crew replaced N2 and O2 bottles in the ACME facility. The Flame Design investigation studies 
the production and control of soot in order to optimize oxygen-enriched combustion and the design of 
robust, soot-free flames. Soot can adversely affect efficiency, emissions, and equipment lifetime, so this 
may lead to more efficient and cleaner burner designs. The experiment is conducted with spherical flames 
of gaseous fuels in the Combustion Integrated Rack (CIR) as part of the Advanced Combustion via 
Microgravity Experiments (ACME) project. 
 
2019 July 30: GMT 211 
Combustion Integration Rack (CIR)/ Advanced Combustion via Microgravity Experiments (ACME) 
Manifold Bottle Exchange: The crew replaced the 40% O2 gas bottle with a 30% O2 bottle. They also 
replaced the ethylene fuel bottle with a hydrogen/methane mixture fuel bottle. Telemetry showed a slow 
leak in the hydrogen/methane bottle and teams are discussing a recovery plan. Flame Design part 1 
investigation is complete and preparations are in work for transition to the s-Flame investigation. The 
purpose of s-Flame is to advance our ability to predict the structure and dynamics, including extinction 
and instabilities, of both soot-free and sooty flames. The results may contribute to the development of 
lean-burn engines for improved efficiency and reduced pollutant emissions here on Earth. 

=== PAGE 79 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
79 
 
 
This crew activity was in support of the s-Flame investigation, but the entry was included because it 
references the end of Flame Design’s first round operations, for which the final test day was on July 25. 
 
Second round (inverse flames except for the first day) 
2021 
 
2021 Oct 26: GMT 299 
Combustion Integrated Rack/Advanced Combustion via Microgravity Experiments (CIR/ACME): The 
crew removed a used bottle with 30% butane/50% N2 and replaced it with a 100% propane gas 
bottle.  This was performed in preparation for a series of calibration burns prior to the Flame Design part 
2 experiment.  The Flame Design investigation studies the production and control of soot in order to 
optimize oxygen-enriched combustion and the design of robust, soot-free flames. Soot can adversely 
affect efficiency, emissions, and equipment lifetime, so this may lead to more efficient and cleaner burner 
designs. 
 
2021 Nov. 2: GMT 306 
Advanced Combustion via Microgravity Experiments (ACME):  A crewmember replaced the ACME Fiber 
Arm 1, Pressure Switch 2 with the ACME Pressure Switch Jumper, and replaced the ACME Igniter Tip 
2.  This is in preparation of Flame Design part 2 operations.  The ACME project is a set of six independent 
studies of gaseous flames to be conducted in the Combustion Integrated Rack (CIR).  ACME’s primary and 
secondary goals are (1) improved fuel efficiency and reduced pollutant production in practical combustion 
on Earth, and (2) spacecraft fire prevention through innovative research focused on materials 
flammability. 
 
2021 Nov. 3: GMT 307 
ACME (Advanced Combustion via Microgravity Experiments):  A crewmember performed the second 
part of configuration for Flame Design part 2 by replacing two ACME controllers and setting the CIR Valve 
Timers to limit oxygen flow.  The ACME project is a set of six independent studies of gaseous flames to be 
conducted in the Combustion Integrated Rack (CIR).  ACME’s primary and secondary goals are (1) 
improved fuel efficiency and reduced pollutant production in practical combustion on Earth, and (2) 
spacecraft fire prevention through innovative research focused on materials flammability. 
 
CIR (Combustion Integrated Rack):  A crewmember replaced the Manifold #2 CIR High Percentage Oxygen 
Bottle with a new bottle containing 85% O2 and 15% N2. The CIR Manifold #4 Bottle was also replaced 
with a new bottle containing 100% C2H4.  The CIR includes an optics bench, combustion chamber, fuel, 
and oxidizer control, and five different cameras for performing combustion investigations in microgravity. 
 
2021 Dec. 3: GMT 337 
ACME (Advanced Combustion via Microgravity Experiments):  Crewmembers replaced the Manifold 4 
bottle with a new bottle containing 100% Ethylene.  The ACME project is a set of six independent studies 
of gaseous flames to be conducted in the Combustion Integrated Rack (CIR).  ACME’s primary and 
secondary goals are (1) improved fuel efficiency and reduced pollutant production in practical combustion 
on Earth, and (2) spacecraft fire prevention through innovative research focused on materials 
flammability. 
 

=== PAGE 80 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
80 
 
 
2021 Dec. 13: GMT 347 
Combustion Integrated Rack/Advanced Combustion via Microgravity Experiments (CIR/ACME): The 
crew replaced a 100% ethylene (CH2=CH2) fuel bottle with a new bottle of the same composition.  This 
was performed in support of the on-going Flame Design part 2 experiment.  The Flame Design 
investigation studies the production and control of soot in order to optimize oxygen-enriched combustion 
and the design of robust, soot-free flames. Soot can adversely affect efficiency, emissions, and equipment 
lifetime, so this may lead to more efficient and cleaner burner designs. 
 
2021 Dec. 21: GMT 355 
Combustion Integrated Rack/Advanced Combustion via Microgravity Experiments (CIR/ACME):  The 
crew replaced an 85% oxygen/15% nitrogen bottle with another bottle of the same composition.  They 
also replaced a 100% ethylene (CH2=CH2) fuel bottle with a new bottle of the same composition.  This was 
performed in support of the on-going Flame Design part 2 experiment.  The Flame Design investigation 
studies the production and control of soot in order to optimize oxygen-enriched combustion and the 
design of robust, soot-free flames. Soot can adversely affect efficiency, emissions, and equipment lifetime, 
so this may lead to more efficient and cleaner burner designs. 
 
2022 
 
2022 Jan. 5: GMT 005 
Combustion Integrated Rack (CIR): CIR Manifold #4 bottle was replaced with a new Bottle containing 
100% Ethane (C2H4). The CIR includes an optics bench, combustion chamber, fuel, and oxidizer control, 
and five different cameras for performing combustion investigations in microgravity. 
 
2022 Jan. 17: GMT 017 
Combustion Integrated Rack/Advanced Combustion via Microgravity Experiments (CIR/ACME):  After 
removing the ACME experiment insert, a pressure switch and igniter tip were replaced, and a mis-aligned 
fiber array was brought back into alignment.  This was performed in support of the on-going Flame Design 
part 2 experiment.  The silicon carbide fibers in the array allow temperature determination of various 
areas in and around the flame based on the color they glow.  The Flame Design investigation studies the 
production and control of soot in order to optimize oxygen-enriched combustion and the design of robust, 
soot-free flames. Soot can adversely affect efficiency, emissions, and equipment lifetime, so this may lead 
to more efficient and cleaner burner designs. 
 
2022 Jan. 24: GMT 024 
Combustion Integrated Rack/Advanced Combustion via Microgravity Experiments (CIR/ACME):  After 
removing the ACME experiment insert, a pressure switch and igniter tip were replaced, and a mis-aligned 
fiber array was brought back into alignment.  This was performed in support of the on-going Flame Design 
part 2 experiment.  The silicon carbide fibers in the array allow temperature determination of various 
areas in and around the flame based on the color they glow.  The Flame Design investigation studies the 
production and control of soot in order to optimize oxygen-enriched combustion and the design of robust, 
soot-free flames. Soot can adversely affect efficiency, emissions, and equipment lifetime, so this may lead 
to more efficient and cleaner burner designs. 
 
 
 

=== PAGE 81 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
81 
 
 
2022 Jan. 26: GMT 026 
Combustion Integrated Rack (CIR):  The CIR high percentage oxygen bottle was replaced with a new bottle 
containing 85% O2 and 15% N2. The fuel bottle in Manifold 4 was replaced with a new bottle containing 
100% C2H4.  The CIR includes an optics bench, combustion chamber, fuel, and oxidizer control, and five 
different cameras for performing combustion investigations in microgravity. 
 
2022 Jan. 31: GMT 031 
Combustion Integrated Rack (CIR):  The CIR Manifold #4 Bottle was swapped out with a bottle containing 
100% C2H4.  The CIR includes an optics bench, combustion chamber, fuel and oxidizer control, and five 
different cameras for performing combustion investigations in microgravity. 
 
2022 Feb. 8: GMT 039 
Combustion Integrated Rack (CIR): The crew performed steps in support of the multi-part rack 
reconfiguration from the Advanced Combustion via Microgravity Experiments (ACME) experiment insert 
to the Solid Fuel Ignition and Extinction (SoFIE) experiment insert. Specifically, the crew exchanged bottles 
at manifold 2 and 4, exchanged the adsorber cartridge, set the CIR valve timers, and disconnected the 
static mixer hose inside the CIR combustion chamber. SoFIE is a hardware insert for CIR that enables a 
wide range of solid-material combustion and fire suppression studies, providing common infrastructure 
including sample holders, flow control, test sections, external radiant heaters, igniters, and diagnostics for 
multiple investigations. While SoFIE initially meets the requirements of five investigations, is intended for 
use by any researchers who propose related solid combustion studies to NASA in the future. 
The transition from ACME to the SoFIE project is not included in this log, except for this initial example, 
because it is considered here as SoFIE setup. 
 
 
 
 

=== PAGE 82 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
82 
 
 
Appendix I. Crew Activity per the NASA Space Station Blog 
This section includes an excerpt from https://blogs.nasa.gov/spacestation/.  Hyperlinks were generally not 
included. 
 
Second round (inverse flames except for the first day) 
2021 
2021 Oct. 26 - Station Gets Ready for Russian Cargo and SpaceX Crew Missions 
Science as usual is continuously ongoing aboard the space station. NASA Flight Engineer Mark Vande Hei 
swapped fuel bottles inside the Combustion Integrated Rack. 
 
 
 
 
 

=== PAGE 83 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
83 
 
 
Appendix J. Crew Activity in Publicly Available NASA Photos 
These photos of Flame Design operations are available from https://images.nasa.gov/.  Additional photos 
from the ACME project, CIR facility, etc. can be found by searching that website. 
 
Photo ID 
Date taken 
Summary description 
iss059e017072 
2019-04-09 
Christina Koch (NASA) with the ACME chamber insert on workbench 
where a BRE burner can be seen (prior to its replacement with a 
spherical burner) 
iss059e017127 
2019-04-09 
Christina Koch (NASA) with the ACME insert within open Combustion 
Integrated Rack (CIR) chamber 
iss059e060847 
2019-05-10 
David Saint-Jacques (CSA) with the ACME insert partially withdrawn 
from open Combustion Integrated Rack (CIR) chamber 
iss059e085880 
2019-05-31 
Nick Hague (NASA) with the ACME insert within open Combustion 
Integrated Rack (CIR) chamber 
iss059e103188 
2019-06-14 
spherical burner within ACME chamber insert 
iss060e011502 
2019-07-17 
Nick Hague (NASA) in mask and goggles with the ACME insert within 
open CIR chamber 
iss066e029031 
2021-11-02 
Shane Kimbrough (NASA) with the Combustion Integrated Rack (CIR) 
with the chamber closed 
iss066e031702 
2021-11-02 
Shane Kimbrough (NASA) with the ACME insert held outside of open 
Combustion Integrated Rack (CIR) chamber 
iss066e095422 
2021-12-21 
Raja Chari (NASA) with the top door of the Combustion Integrated Rack 
(CIR) open for bottle swap(s) 
iss066e114301 
2022-01-17 
Raja Chari (NASA) with the ACME insert partially withdrawn from open 
CIR chamber 
iss066e114415 
2022-01-17 
Raja Chari (NASA) with the ACME insert partially withdrawn from the 
CIR, of which only the hatch door is visible 
 
 
 

=== PAGE 84 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
84 
 
 
Appendix K. ACME Operations per @ISS_Research on Twitter 
These tweets (from https://twitter.com/ISS_Research/) featured Flame Design images.    There may be 
others which are not included here. 
 
2019 Sept. 10: GMT 253 
 
 

=== PAGE 85 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
85 
 
 
2019 Sept. 12: GMT 255 
 
 
 

=== PAGE 86 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
86 
 
 
2019 Oct. 18: GMT 291 
 
 
 

=== PAGE 87 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
87 
 
 
2020 June 25: GMT 177 
 
 
 
 

=== PAGE 88 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
88 
 
 
2020 July 23: GMT 205 
 
 

=== PAGE 89 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
89 
 
 
2021 March 29: GMT 088 
 

=== PAGE 90 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
90 
 
 
2022 Feb. 18: GMT 049 
 

=== PAGE 91 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
91 
 
 
2022 Feb. 18: GMT 049 
 
 
 
 

=== PAGE 92 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
92 
 
 
Appendix L. ACME Operations per Astronauts on Twitter 
This tweet is from an ISS crew member who conducted operations in support of the Flame Design 
experiment.  There may be others which are not included here. 
 
Christina H. Koch (@Astro_Christina) on Twitter 
https://twitter.com/astro_christina/ 
 
2019 April 23: GMT 113 
 

=== PAGE 93 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
93 
 
 
Appendix M. Summary of the ISS data collection 
The Flame Design data is all digital and includes both image and non-image data, where that is generally 
true for the ACME experiments.  To be clear, there was no collection of soot or other physical samples 
that were subsequently transported to the ground.  
 
The Flame Design image data includes images from the following cameras: 
1. ACME DataCam, used with a clear fused-silica ‘filter’ and various zoom and focus settings (but 
those settings were consistent within each individual test) 
2. CFI intensified camera, used at least generally with a CH* filter 
3. High-Bitdepth Multispectral (HiBMs) camera, equipped with a red filter corresponding to the 
opposing CIR illumination package 
 
The raw DataCam images are in a Halcon Iconic Object (hobj) format as well as a converted Tagged Image 
File (tif) format.  NASA’s post-processing of the raw images was carried out without each of the following: 
a. color balancing (to avoid possible saturation)  
b. dark frame subtraction 
c. removal of hot spots from dead pixels (e.g., resulting from radiation damage)  
Furthermore, the conversion employed a standard bilinear demosaicing process which is detrimental 
when determining temperature profiles via Thin Filament Pyrometry (TFP) because it will average pixels 
both on and off the glowing fibers. 
 
The images from the CFI and HiBMs cameras are provided in a tif format.  Meanwhile, the analog 
operations (ops) video was recorded on the ground in a Transport Stream (ts) format. 
 
The key non-imaging data from a test is a comma-delimited file that is described in detail in the Software 
Interface Design Description (ACME-DOC-010 Rev. D). 
 
The CIR’s Gas Chromatograph Instrumentation Package (GCIP) was used during a limited number of Flame 
Design test days and the resulting raw data files are in a text (i.e., ASCII) format. 
 
Consult the forthcoming ACME/Flame Design Data Interpretation document to learn more. 
 
The raw Flame Design data is currently archived at NASA and work is underway to make it available 
publicly through NASA’s Physical Science Informatics System (PSI). 
 
 
 
 
 

=== PAGE 94 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
94 
 
 
Appendix N. Publications, presentations, awards, and outreach  
 
N.1 Publications and Presentations with ISS Results  
Refereed Journal Articles 
29.  P.H. Irace, K. Waddell, D. Constales, P.B. Sunderland, R.L. Axelbaum, Critical temperature 
and reactant mass flux for radiative extinction of ethylene microgravity spherical diffusion 
flames at 1 bar, Proc. Combust. Inst. (in press) 
 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2022.07.043 
28.  P.H. Irace, K Waddell, D. Constales, G. Yablonsky, M. Kim, P.B. Sunderland, R.L. Axelbaum, 
On the existence of steady state gaseous microgravity spherical diffusion flames in the 
presence of radiation heat loss, Proc. Combust. Inst. (in press)  
 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2022.07.049 
27.  P.H. Irace, H. Lee, K. Waddell, L. Tan, D.P. Stocker, P.B. Sunderland, R.L. Axelbaum, 
Observations of long duration microgravity spherical diffusion flames aboard the 
International 
Space 
Station, 
Combustion 
and 
Flame, 
229 
(2021) 
111373. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2021.02.019 
 
Conference Proceedings, Abstracts, Posters, Etc. 
64.  P.H. Irace, K. Waddell, Z. Xu, D. Constales, P.B. Sunderland, R.L. Axelbaum, Microgravity 
Spherical Diffusion Flames: The Critical Point for Radiative Extinction and the Dynamics to 
Reach It, U.S. National Combustion Meeting (2021).  
63.  K. Waddell, P.B. Sunderland, S. Medvedev, S. Frolov, P.H. Irace, R.L. Axelbaum, Flame and 
Burner Temperature Measurements and Predictions in Spherical Diffusion Flames, U.S. 
National Combustion Meeting, 2021, 9 pp.  
62.  K. Waddell, P.B. Sunderland, S. Medvedev, S. Frolov, P.H. Irace, R.L. Axelbaum, Flame and 
Burner Temperature Measurements and Predictions in Spherical Diffusion Flames, Abstract, 
ASGSR, Baltimore, 2021.  
61.  P. Irace, L. Tan, K. Waddell, H.J. Lee, D. Stocker, D.L. Urban, P.B. Sunderland, R.L. Axelbaum, 
Flame Ignition in Space, Art Competition Poster, ASGSR, 2020.  
60.  P.H. Irace, H.J. Lee, K. Waddell, L. Tan, D.P. Stocker, P.B. Sunderland, R.L. Axelbaum, 
Observations of Long Duration Microgravity Spherical Diffusion Flames Aboard the 
International Space Station, Abstract, Annual ASGSR Meeting, 2020. 
59.  P. Irace, H.J. Lee, K. Waddell, L. Tan, D.P. Stocker, D.L. Urban, P.B. Sunderland, R.L. 
Axelbaum, Steady-State and Radiatively Extinguishing Spherical Diffusion Flames in 
Microgravity, Abstract, ASGSR, Denver, 2019.  
58.  P. Irace, L. Tan, K. Waddell, H.J. Lee, D.P. Stocker, D.L. Urban, P.B. Sunderland, R.L. 
Axelbaum, A Galaxy of Soot Particles, Art Competition Entry, ASGSR, Denver, 2019.  
 
Theses and Dissertations 
15. 
Phillip H. Irace, Particle Formation and Thermal Radiation in Laminar Diffusion Flames 
with Applications to Energy and Materials, Ph.D. Dissertation, Washington University in 
St. Louis, Dept. of Mechanical Engineering and Materials Science, 200+ pp, May 2022. 
 
 
 

=== PAGE 95 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
95 
 
 
N.2 Publications and Presentations (comprehensive list) 
Papers, etc. in this section which include ISS results are enclosed in borders like this. 
 
Refereed Journal Articles 
30.  P.H. Irace, A. Gopan, R.L. Axelbaum, An investigation of thermal radiation from laminar 
diffusion flames in a tri-coflow burner with central oxygen, Combust and Flame, 242 (2022) 
112158.  
 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2022.112158 
29.  P.H. Irace, K. Waddell, D. Constales, P.B. Sunderland, R.L. Axelbaum, Critical temperature 
and reactant mass flux for radiative extinction of ethylene microgravity spherical diffusion 
flames at 1 bar, Proc. Combust. Inst. (in press) 
 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2022.07.043 
28.  P.H. Irace, K Waddell, D. Constales, G. Yablonsky, M. Kim, P.B. Sunderland, R.L. Axelbaum, 
On the existence of steady state gaseous microgravity spherical diffusion flames in the 
presence of radiation heat loss, Proc. Combust. Inst. (in press)  
 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2022.07.049 
27.  P.H. Irace, H. Lee, K. Waddell, L. Tan, D.P. Stocker, P.B. Sunderland, R.L. Axelbaum, 
Observations of long duration microgravity spherical diffusion flames aboard the 
International 
Space 
Station, 
Combustion 
and 
Flame, 
229 
(2021) 
111373. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2021.02.019 
26.  Z. Wang, P.B. Sunderland, R.L. Axelbaum, Double Blue Zones in Inverse and Normal Laminar 
Jet Diffusion Flames, Combustion and Flame 211 (2020) 253-259.  
 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2019.09.014 
25.  Z. Wang, P.B. Sunderland, R.L. Axelbaum, Dilution Effects on Laminar Jet Diffusion Flame 
Lengths, Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 37 (2019) 1547-1553. 
 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2018.06.085 
24.  W. Wu and R.L. Axelbaum, A new method of flame temperature measurement utilizing the 
acoustic emissions from laser-induced plasmas, Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 37 
(2019) 1409-1415.  
 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2018.07.096 
23.  M.K. Rodenhurst III, B.-H. Chao, P.B. Sunderland, R.L. Axelbaum, Structure and Extinction of 
Spherical Burner-Stabilized Diffusion Flames that are Attached to the Burner Surface, 
Combustion and Flame 187 (2018) 22-29.  
 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2017.08.024 
22.  A. Gopan, Z. Yang, B.M. Kumfer, R.L. Axelbaum, Effects of Inert Placement (Zst) on Soot and 
Radiative Heat Flux in Turbulent Diffusion Flames, Energy and Fuels 31 (2017) 7617-7623.  
 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.energyfuels.7b01092 
21.  W. Wu, G. Yablonsky, R.L. Axelbaum, Observation of water–gas shift equilibrium in diffusion 
flames, Combustion and Flame 173 (2016) 57-64.  
 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2016.07.025 
20.  S. Krishnan, B.M. Kumfer, W. Wu, J. Li, A. Nehorai, R.L. Axelbaum, An Approach to 
Thermocouple Measurements That Reduces Uncertainties in High-Temperature 
Environments, Energy and Fuels 29 (2015) 3446-3455. 
 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.energyfuels.5b00071 
19.  V.R. Lecoustre, P.B. Sunderland, B.H. Chao, R.L. Axelbaum, Modeled Quenching Limits of 
Spherical Hydrogen Diffusion Flames, Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 34 (2013) 
887-894. 

=== PAGE 96 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
96 
 
 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2012.07.029 
18.  F. Xia, R.L. Axelbaum, Simplifying the Complexity of Diffusion Flames Through Interpretation 
in C/O Ratio Space, Computers and Mathematics with Applications, 65 (2013) 1625-1632.  
 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.camwa.2013.01.008 
17.  F. Xia, G.S. Yablonsky, R.L. Axelbaum, Numerical Study of Flame Structure and Soot Inception 
Interpreted in Carbon-to-Oxygen Atom Ratio Space, Proceedings of the Combustion 
Institute, 34 (2013) 1085-1091.   
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2012.06.043 
16.  F. Yi, R.L. Axelbaum, Stability of Spray Combustion for Water/Alcohols Mixtures in Oxygen-
Enriched Air, Proceedings of the Combustion Institute, 34 (2013) 1697-1704.  
 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2012.05.088 
15.  V.R. Lecoustre, P.B. Sunderland, B.H. Chao, R.L. Axelbaum, Numerical Investigation of 
Spherical Diffusion Flames at their Sooting Limits, Combustion and Flame 159 (2012) 194-
199.  
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2011.05.022 
14.  Q. Wang, B.H. Chao, Kinetic and Radiative Extinctions of Spherical Burner-Stabilized 
Diffusion Flames, Combustion and Flame 158 (2011) 1532-1541.  
 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2010.12.007 
13.  V.R. Lecoustre, P.B. Sunderland, B.H. Chao, R.L. Axelbaum, Extremely Weak Hydrogen 
Flames, Combustion and Flame 157 (2010) 2209-2210.  
 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2010.07.024 
12.  S.A. Skeen, G. Yablonsky, R.L. Axelbaum Characteristics of Non-Premixed Oxygen-Enhanced 
Combustion: II. Flame Structure Effects on Soot Precursor Kinetics Resulting in Soot-Free 
Flames, Combustion and Flame 157 (2010) 1745-1752. 
 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2010.04.013 
11.  S.A. Skeen, G. Yablonsky, R.L. Axelbaum Characteristics of Non-Premixed Oxygen-Enhanced 
Combustion: I. The Presence of Appreciable Oxygen at the Location of Maximum 
Temperature, Combustion and Flame 156 (2009) 2145–2152.  
 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2009.07.009 
10. 
Kumfer, B.M., Skeen, S.A., Axelbaum, R. L., Soot Inception Limits in Laminar Diffusion Flames 
with Application to Oxy-Fuel Combustion, Combustion and Flame 154 (2008) 546-556.  
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2008.03.008 
9.  
Santa, K.J., Chao, B.H., Sunderland, P.B., Urban, D.L., Stocker, D.P., Axelbaum, R.L., Radiative 
Extinction of Gaseous Spherical Diffusion Flames in Microgravity, Combustion and Flame 
151 (2007) 665-675.  
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2007.08.009 
8.  
Santa, K.J., Sun, Z., Chao, B.H., Sunderland, P.B., Axelbaum, R.L., Urban, D.L., Stocker, D.P., 
Numerical and Experimental Observations of Spherical Diffusion Flames, Combustion 
Theory and Modeling 11 (2007) 639-652.  
https://doi.org/10.1080/13647830601161567 
7.  
Kumfer, B.M., Skeen, S.A., Chen, R., Axelbaum, R.L., Measurement and Analysis of Soot 
Inception Limits of Oxygen-Enriched Coflow Flames, Combustion and Flame 147 (2006) 233-
242.  
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2006.08.004 
6.  
Chen, R., Axelbaum, R.L., Scalar Dissipation Rate at Extinction and the Effects of Oxygen-
Enriched Combustion, Combustion and Flame 142 (2005) 62-71.  
 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2005.02.008 

=== PAGE 97 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
97 
 
 
5.  
Liu, S., Chao, B.H. and Axelbaum, R.L., A Theoretical Study on Soot Inception in Spherical 
Burner-Stabilized Diffusion Flames, Combustion and Flame 140 1-23 (2005).  
 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2004.08.016 
4.  
Sunderland, P.B., Urban, D.L., Stocker, D.P., Chao, B.-H., Axelbaum, R.L., Sooting Limits of 
Microgravity Spherical Diffusion Flames in Oxygen-Enriched Air and Diluted Fuel, 
Combustion Science and Technology 176 (2004) 2143-2164.  
 
https://doi.org/10.1080/00102200490514994 
3.  
1Sunderland, P.B., Axelbaum, R.L., Urban, D.L., Chao, B.H., Liu, S., Effects of Structure and 
Hydrodynamics on the Sooting Behavior of Spherical Microgravity Diffusion Flames, 
Combustion and Flame 132 (2003) 25-33.   
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0010-2180(02)00424-8 
2.  
Chao, B.H. and Axelbaum, R.L., On By-Product Production in Nonpremixed Flames with 
Implications towards Emission of Organics during Waste Incineration, Combustion Science 
and Technology, 160, 191-220 (2000). 
 
https://doi.org/10.1080/00102200008935802 
1.  
Chao, B.H., Liu, S., and Axelbaum, R.L., On Soot Inception in Nonpremixed Flames and the 
Effects of Flame Structure, Combustion Science and Technology, Vol. 138, pp. 105-135 
(1998). 
https://doi.org/10.1080/00102209808952065 
 
1 Recipient of Best-Paper Award from Northern Ohio section of AIAA, 2003.  
 
Conference Proceedings, Abstracts, Posters, Etc. 
67. 
K.A. Waddell, G. Yablonsky, D. Constales, R.L. Axelbaum, P.B. Sunderland, The kinetics and 
warm flame chemistry associated with radiative extinction of spherical diffusion flames, U.S. 
National Combustion Meeting, College Station, Texas, 8 pp., 2023. 
66.  P.H. Irace, R.L. Axelbaum, The effect of stoichiometric mixture fraction on soot formation 
and thermal radiation in an aromatic compound relative to aliphatic compounds, 38th 
International Symposium on Combustion, Poster, Adelaide, Australia, 2021.  
65.  P.H. Irace, D. Khatri, A. Gopan, R.L. Axelbaum, Measurements of Thermal Radiation from 
Laminar Diffusion Flames with Central Oxygen Enrichment in a Triple Port Burner, 12th U.S. 
National Combustion Meeting, Virtual, 2021.  
64.  P.H. Irace, K. Waddell, Z. Xu, D. Constales, P.B. Sunderland, R.L. Axelbaum, Microgravity 
Spherical Diffusion Flames: The Critical Point for Radiative Extinction and the Dynamics to 
Reach It, U.S. National Combustion Meeting (2021).  
63.  K. Waddell, P.B. Sunderland, S. Medvedev, S. Frolov, P.H. Irace, R.L. Axelbaum, Flame and 
Burner Temperature Measurements and Predictions in Spherical Diffusion Flames, U.S. 
National Combustion Meeting, 2021, 9 pp.  
62.  K. Waddell, P.B. Sunderland, S. Medvedev, S. Frolov, P.H. Irace, R.L. Axelbaum, Flame and 
Burner Temperature Measurements and Predictions in Spherical Diffusion Flames, Abstract, 
ASGSR, Baltimore, 2021.  
61.  P. Irace, L. Tan, K. Waddell, H.J. Lee, D. Stocker, D.L. Urban, P.B. Sunderland, R.L. Axelbaum, 
Flame Ignition in Space, Art Competition Poster, ASGSR, 2020.  
60.  P.H. Irace, H.J. Lee, K. Waddell, L. Tan, D.P. Stocker, P.B. Sunderland, R.L. Axelbaum, 
Observations of Long Duration Microgravity Spherical Diffusion Flames Aboard the 
International Space Station, Abstract, Annual ASGSR Meeting, 2020. 

=== PAGE 98 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
98 
 
 
59.  P. Irace, H.J. Lee, K. Waddell, L. Tan, D.P. Stocker, D.L. Urban, P.B. Sunderland, R.L. 
Axelbaum, Steady-State and Radiatively Extinguishing Spherical Diffusion Flames in 
Microgravity, Abstract, ASGSR, Denver, 2019.  
58.  P. Irace, L. Tan, K. Waddell, H.J. Lee, D.P. Stocker, D.L. Urban, P.B. Sunderland, R.L. 
Axelbaum, A Galaxy of Soot Particles, Art Competition Entry, ASGSR, Denver, 2019.  
57.  P.H. Irace, Z. Yang, A. Gopan, R.L. Axelbaum, Soot Formation and Radiation Heat Transfer in 
Tri-axial Diffusion Flames. U.S. National Combustion Meeting, Pasadena, 2019.  
56.  Z. Wang, P.B. Sunderland, R.L. Axelbaum, Double Luminous Zones in Laminar Jet Diffusion 
Flames, U.S. National Combustion Meeting, Pasadena, 2019, 9 pp.  
55.  Z. Wang, P.B. Sunderland, R.L. Axelbaum, Double Blue Zones in Inverse Laminar Jet Diffusion 
Flames, Poster, 37th International Symposium on Combustion, Dublin, 2018.  
54.  Z. Wang, P.B. Sunderland, R.L. Axelbaum, Double Luminous Zones in Inverse Laminar Jet 
Diffusion Flames, Eastern States Section of the Combustion Institute, State College PA, 2018, 
6 pp.  
53.  Z. Wang, P.B. Sunderland, R.L. Axelbaum, Images of Co-Axial Gas Jet Diffusion Flames, Art 
Competition Poster, U.S. National Combustion Meeting, College Park, 2017.  
52.  Z. Wang, P.B. Sunderland, R.L. Axelbaum, Observations of Double Flames in Inverse Gas Jet 
Diffusion Flames, U.S. National Combustion Meeting, College Park, 2017, 6 pp.  
51  
Z. Wang, P.B. Sunderland, R.L. Axelbaum, The Effects of Reactant Dilution on Lengths of 
Laminar Jet Diffusion Flames, U.S. National Combustion Meeting, College Park, 2017, 6 pp.  
50.  Z. Wang, W. Wu, P.B. Sunderland, R.L. Axelbaum, Ground-Based Research Supporting Flame 
Design, ASGSR Abstract, Seattle, 2017.  
49.  Z. Wang, M. El Makawy, P.B. Sunderland, B. Chao, R.L. Axelbaum, The Effects of Reactant 
Dilution on Lengths of Laminar Jet Diffusion Flames, Abstract, ASGSR, Cleveland OH (2016).  
48.  Z. Wang, M. El Makawy, P.B. Sunderland, B. Chao, R.L. Axelbaum, The Effects of Reactant 
Dilution on Lengths of Laminar Jet Diffusion Flames, Poster, ASGSR, Cleveland OH, 2016.  
47.  Z. Wang, P.B. Sunderland, B. Chao, R.L. Axelbaum, Color Images of Normal and Inverse 
Diffusion Flames, Art Competition Poster, ASGSR, Cleveland OH, 2016.  
46.  W. Wu, R.L. Axelbaum, Interpreting Flame Structure by Conserved Scalar Measurement 
Using Laser-Induced Breakdown Spectroscopy, Combustion Institute Central States 
Meeting, Knoxville (2016).  
45.  W. Wu, R.L. Axelbaum, Interpreting Flame Structure by Mixture Fraction Measurement 
Using Laser-Induced Breakdown Spectroscopy, Abstract, ASGSR, Cleveland OH (2016).  
44.  V.R. Lecoustre, P.B. Sunderland, B.-H. Chao, R.L. Axelbaum, Numerical Investigations of 
Temperature Effects on Soot Precursors in Ethylene Premixed Flames, 9th U.S. National 
Combustion Meeting, Cincinnati, 10 pp. (2015).  
43.  W. Wu, R.L. Axelbaum, Interpreting Diffusion Flame Structure by Measuring C/O Ratio Using 
Laser-Induced Breakdown Spectroscopy, 9th U.S. National Combustion Meeting, Cincinnati 
(2015).  
42.  W. Wu, R.L. Axelbaum, Interpreting Flame Structure by Scalar Measurement Using Laser-
Induced Breakdown Spectroscopy, 29th Israeli Combustion Symposium (2015).  
41.  W. Wu, R.L. Axelbaum, Simultaneous Measurement of Conserved Scalars in Flames Using 
LIBS, SciX, The Great Scientific Exchange, Providence (2015).  
40.  W. Wu, P.B. Sunderland, B.-H. Chao, D.L. Urban, R.L. Axelbaum, Recent Advances in Flame 
Design, A Spaceflight Combustion Experiment, Abstract, American Society of Space and 
Gravitational Research, Arlington VA (2015).  

=== PAGE 99 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
99 
 
 
39.  W. Wu, G. Yablonsky, R.L. Axelbaum, New Observation of Water Gas Shift Equilibrium in 
Flames, 9th International Conference on Chemical Kinetics, Ghent, Belgium (2015).  
38.  V.R. Lecoustre, P.B. Sunderland, B.-H. Chao, R.L. Axelbaum, Study of Temperature Effects on 
Soot Precursor Formation in Nonbuoyant, Laminar Ethylene Premixed Flames, American 
Society of Space and Gravitational Research, Abstract, Pasadena (2014).  
37.  V.R. Lecoustre, P.B. Sunderland, B.-H. Chao, R.L. Axelbaum, Effects of Temperature and 
Equivalence Ratio on Soot Precursors in Rich Premixed Flames, Poster, Eighth U.S. National 
Combustion Meeting, Salt Lake City (2013).  
36.  M. Dehnavi, M.K. Rodenhurst, B.H. Chao, V.R. Lecoustre, P.B. Sunderland, R.L. Axelbaum, A 
Numerical Study on the Soot Free Conditions of Spherical Diffusion Flames, Central States 
Section of the Combustion Institute, Dayton (2012) 8 pp.  
35.  V.R. Lecoustre, P.B. Sunderland, B.H. Chao, R.L. Axelbaum, Numerical Investigation of 
Hydrogen Diffusion Flame Quenching Limits in Microgravity, Central States Section of the 
Combustion Institute, Dayton (2012) 9 pp.  
34.  S. Lieb, S.A. Skeen, B.M. Kumfer, F. Xia, R.L. Axelbaum, Characterization of the High-
Temperature Soot Inception Zone Boundary in Nonpremixed Flames 7th U.S. National 
Combustion Meeting, Atlanta (2011) 6 pp.  
33.  V.R. Lecoustre, P.B. Sunderland, B.H. Chao, R.L. Axelbaum, Characterization of Microgravity 
Spherical Diffusion Flame Sooting Limits, 7th U.S. National Combustion Meeting, Atlanta 
(2011) 6 pp.  
32.  V.R. Lecoustre, P.B. Sunderland, B.H. Chao, R.L. Axelbaum, Numerical Study of Laminar 
Spherical Hydrogen Diffusion Flames at Low Flow Rates, 7th U.S. National Combustion 
Meeting, Atlanta (2011) 6 pp.  
31.  V.R. Lecoustre, C.W. Moran, P.B. Sunderland, B.H. Chao, R.L. Axelbaum, Experimental and 
Numerical Investigation of Extremely Weak Hydrogen Diffusion Flames, 6th U.S. National 
Combustion Meeting, Ann Arbor (2009) 12 pp.  
30.  V.R. Lecoustre, P.B. Sunderland, B.H. Chao, R.L. Axelbaum, Numerical Simulations of Soot 
Kinetics in Spherical Diffusion Flames, Eastern States Meeting of the Combustion Institute, 
College Park (2009) 8 pp.  
29.  V.R. Lecoustre, P.B. Sunderland, B.H. Chao, D.L. Urban, D.P. Stocker, R.L. Axelbaum, 
Numerical Simulations of Spherical Diffusion Flames at their Sooting Limits, 6th U.S. National 
Combustion Meeting, Ann Arbor (2009) 9 pp.  
28.  V.R. Lecoustre, P.B. Sunderland, B.H. Chao, D.L. Urban, D.P. Stocker, R.L. Axelbaum, Effects 
of C/O Ratio and Temperature on Sooting Limits of Spherical Diffusion Flames, 46th 
Aerospace Sciences Meeting, Reno, Paper AIAA-2008-827 (2008) 9 pp. 
 
https://arc.aiaa.org/doi/pdf/10.2514/6.2008-827 
27.  V.R. Lecoustre, P.B. Sunderland, B.H. Chao, D.L. Urban, D.P. Stocker, R.L. Axelbaum, Sooting 
Limits of Ethylene Spherical Diffusion Flames, Poster, 32nd International Symposium on 
Combustion, Montreal (2008).  
26.  P.B. Sunderland, D.L. Urban, D.P. Stocker, B.H. Chao, R.L. Axelbaum, Quasi-Steady 
Microgravity Spherical Ethylene Diffusion Flame, Fire Science Image, International 
Association of Fire Safety Science, Karlsruhe (2008).  
25.  Q. Wang, and B.H. Chao, , Kinetic and Radiative Extinction of Spherical Diffusion Flames, 5th 
U.S. Combustion Meeting, San Diego (2007) 12 pp.  
24.  V.R. Lecoustre, B.H. Chao, P.B. Sunderland, D.L. Urban, D.P. Stocker, R.L. Axelbaum, A 
Computational Investigation of Sooting Limits of Spherical Diffusion Flames, 5th U.S. 
Combustion Meeting, San Diego (2007) 8 pp.  

=== PAGE 100 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
100 
 
 
23.  V.R. Lecoustre, B.H. Chao, P.B. Sunderland, D.L. Urban, D.P. Stocker, R.L. Axelbaum, Effects 
of C/O Ratio and Scalar Dissipation Rate on Sooting Limits of Spherical Nonpremixed Flames, 
Eastern States Section of the Combustion Institute, Charlottesville (2007) 10 pp.  
22.  K.J. Santa, B.H. Chao, P.B. Sunderland, D.L. Urban, D.P. Stocker, R.L. Axelbaum, Radiative 
Extinction of Gaseous Spherical Diffusion Flames in Microgravity, 5th U.S. Combustion 
Meeting, San Diego (2007) 13 pp.  
21.  K.J. Santa, Z. Sun, B.H. Chao, P.B. Sunderland, R.L. Axelbaum, D.L. Urban, D.P. Stocker, 
Effects of Lewis Number on Temperatures of Spherical Diffusion Flames, 45th Aerospace 
Sciences Meeting, Reno, Paper AIAA-2007-736 (2007) 9 pp. 
 
https://arc.aiaa.org/doi/pdf/10.2514/6.2007-736 
20.  
2P.B. Sunderland, D.L. Urban, D.P. Stocker, B.H. Chao, R.L. Axelbaum, Spherical Ethylene 
Diffusion Flame in Microgravity, Art Competition Poster, 5th U.S. Combustion Meeting, San 
Diego (2007).  
19.  
3R.L. Axelbaum, D.L. Urban, P.B. Sunderland, B.H. Chao, Spherical Ethylene Diffusion Flame 
in Microgravity, Art Entry, Science and Engineering Visualization Contest, National Science 
Foundation (2006).  
18.  K.J. Santa, B.H. Chao, P.B. Sunderland, J.L. Taylor, D.L. Urban, D.P. Stocker, R.L. Axelbaum, 
Radiative Extinction of Gaseous Spherical Diffusion Flames in Microgravity, 44th Aerospace 
Sciences Meeting, Reno, Paper AIAA-2006-747 (2006) 9 pp. 
 
https://arc.aiaa.org/doi/pdf/10.2514/6.2006-747 
17.  K.J. Santa, Z. Sun, B.H. Chao, P.B. Sunderland, R.L. Axelbaum, D.L. Urban, D.P. Stocker, 
Numerical and Experimental Observations of Spherical Diffusion Flames, Work-in-Progress 
Poster, 31st International Symposium on Combustion, Heidelberg (2006).  
16.  P.B. Sunderland, J.L. Taylor, K.J. Santa, B.-H. Chao, D.L. Urban, D.P. Stocker, R.L. Axelbaum, 
Extinction of Normal and Inverse Spherical Diffusion Flames in Microgravity, 4th U.S. 
Combustion Meeting, Philadelphia (2005) 6 pp.  
15.  K.J. Santa, Z. Sun, R.L. Axelbaum, B.-H. Chao, P.B. Sunderland, D.L. Urban, D.P. Stocker, 
Numerical and Experimental Observations of Spherical Diffusion Flames, 4th U.S. 
Combustion Meeting, Philadelphia (2005) 6 pp.  
14.  Z. Sun, R.L. Axelbaum, B.-H. Chao, P.B. Sunderland, D.L. Urban, D.P. Stocker, Effects of 
Radiation Heat Loss and Lewis Number on the Temperature of Spherical Microgravity 
Diffusion Flames, Spring Technical Meeting of the Combustion Institute Central States 
Section, Austin (2004) 5 pp.  
13.  
4J.L. Taylor, P.B. Sunderland, Z. Sun, D.P. Stocker, D.L. Urban, B.-H. Chao, R.L. Axelbaum, 
Images of Spherical Diffusion Flames, Art Exhibit Poster, 30th International Symposium on 
Combustion, Chicago (2004).  
12.  J.L. Taylor, P.B. Sunderland, Z. Sun, D.P. Stocker, D.L. Urban, B.-H. Chao, R.L. Axelbaum, 
Sooting Limits and Extinction of Spherical Diffusion Flames, Work-in-Progress Poster, 30th 
International Symposium on Combustion, Chicago (2004). 
11.  R.L. Axelbaum, P.B. Sunderland, D.L. Urban, D.P. Stocker, B.-H. Chao, Sooting Limits of 
Diffusion Flames with Oxygen-Enriched Air and Diluted Fuel, abstract, 22nd American 
Association of Aerosol Research Conference, Anaheim (2003).  
10.  P.B. Sunderland, D.L. Urban, B.–H. Chao, D.P. Stocker, R.L. Axelbaum, Sooting Limits of 
Normal and Inverse Microgravity Spherical Diffusion Flames, 3rd U.S. Combustion Meeting, 
Chicago (2003) 6 pp.  

=== PAGE 101 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
101 
 
 
9.  
P.B. Sunderland, D.L. Urban, D.P. Stocker, B.H. Chao, R.L. Axelbaum, Sooting Limits of 
Diffusion Flames with Oxygen-Enriched Air and Diluted Fuel, Seventh International 
Microgravity Combustion Workshop, Cleveland, NASA CP-2003-212376 (2003) pp. 49-52.  
8.  
P.B. Sunderland, D.L. Urban, D.P. Stocker, B.–H. Chao, R.L. Axelbaum, Sooting Limits of 
Microgravity Spherical Diffusion Flames, Poster, Twenty-Ninth Symposium (International) 
on Combustion, The Combustion Institute, Sapporo (2002).  
7.  
P.B. Sunderland, D.L. Urban, D.P Stocker, B.–H. Chao, R.L. Axelbaum, Sooting Limits of 
Microgravity Spherical Diffusion Flames, Spring Technical Meeting of the Combustion 
Institute Central States Section, Knoxville (2002) 6 pp.  
6.  
R.L. Axelbaum, R. Chen, P.B. Sunderland, D.L. Urban, S. Liu, B.H. Chao, Effects of Flame 
Structure and Hydrodynamics on Soot Particle Inception and Flame Extinction in Diffusion 
Flames, Sixth International Microgravity Combustion Workshop, Cleveland, NASA CP-2001-
210826 (2001) pp. 153-156.  
5.  
S. Liu and B.-H. Chao, “Effects of Structure and Hydrodynamics on Soot Inception in 
Spherical Microgravity Diffusion Flames,” Poster Paper #313, Second Joint Meeting of the 
U.S. Sections of the Combustion Institute, Oakland (2001).  
4.  
R.L. Axelbaum, P.B. Sunderland, D.L. Urban, S. Liu, B.–H. Chao, Effects of Structure and 
Hydrodynamics on the Sooting Behavior of Spherical Microgravity Diffusion Flames, Poster 
P467, Twenty-Eighth Symposium (International) on Combustion, The Combustion Institute, 
Edinburgh (2000).  
3.  
P.B. Sunderland, R.L. Axelbaum, D.L. Urban, Effects of Structure and Hydrodynamics on the 
Sooting Behavior of Spherical Microgravity Diffusion Flames, Fifth International 
Microgravity Combustion Workshop, Cleveland, NASA CP-1999-208917 (1999) pp. 475-478.  
2.  
P.B. Sunderland, R.L. Axelbaum, D.L. Urban, Understanding Permanently-Blue Flames 
Through Microgravity Combustion Experiments, 1st U.S. Combustion Meeting, Washington, 
(1999) pp. 453-456.  
1.  
P.B. Sunderland, R.L. Axelbaum, D.L. Urban, Understanding Permanently-Blue Flames 
Through Microgravity Experiments, Poster W5A04, Twenty-Seventh Symposium 
(International) on Combustion, The Combustion Institute, Boulder (1998). 
 
2Recipient of 3rd Prize, Art Competition, 5th U.S. Combustion Meeting, San Diego, 2007.  
3Finalist, Science and Engineering Visualization Challenge, National Science Foundation, 2006.  
4Recipient of Third Prize, Art Competition, 30th International Symposium on Combustion, 2004.  
 
Theses and Dissertations 
15. 
Phillip H. Irace, Particle Formation and Thermal Radiation in Laminar Diffusion Flames with 
Applications to Energy and Materials, Ph.D. Dissertation, Washington University in St. Louis, 
Dept. of Mechanical Engineering and Materials Science, 200+ pp, May 2022. 
14.  Zhengyang Wang, Shapes and Double Blue Zones in Laminar Co-flow Diffusion Flames, 
University of Maryland, Dept. of Mechanical Engineering, 128 pp, August 2019. 
 
https://www.proquest.com/openview/28862866b50531bad30944a84dad40a7/ 
13.  Wendong Wu, Fundamental Studies of Flame Structure Through Laser Plasma Diagnostics, 
Ph.D. Dissertation, Washington University in St. Louis, May 2017.  
 
https://search.proquest.com/docview/1952045801 
12.  El Makawy, Mohamed H., The Effects of Reactant Dilution on Lengths of Laminar Jet 
Diffusion Flames, M.S. Thesis, Ghent Univ., Department of Flow, Heat and Combustion, 54 
pp., Aug. 2016. 

=== PAGE 102 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
102 
 
 
11.  Mahmood Dehnavi, A Numerical Investigation of Microgravity Ethylene/Oxygen/Nitrogen 
Spherical Diffusion Flames at Their Soot Free Limit, M.S. thesis, Department of Mechanical 
Engineering, University of Hawaii (2012).    
http://hdl.handle.net/10125/100951 
10.  Melvin Rodenhurst, Kinetic Extinction Limit of a Spherical Diffusion Flame Attached to a 
Burner Surface, M.S. thesis, Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Hawaii 
(2012).   
http://hdl.handle.net/10125/101022 
9.  
Vivien R. Lecoustre, Numerical Investigations of Gaseous Spherical Diffusion Flames, Ph.D. 
Dissertation, University of Maryland, Department of Mechanical Engineering, December 
(2009). 
 
http://hdl.handle.net/1903/9966 
8.  
Scott A. Skeen, Oxygen-Enhanced Combustion: Theory and Applications, Ph.D. Dissertation, 
Department of Energy, Environmental and Chemical Engineering, Washington University, 
August (2009). 
 
https://doi.org/10.7936/K7MC8X35 
7.  
Ben Kumfer, Ph.D. Dissertation, Department of Energy, Environmental and Chemical 
Engineering, Washington University (2009).  
6.  
Chad Unrau, Ph.D. Dissertation, Department of Energy, Environmental and Chemical 
Engineering, Washington University (2009).   
5.  
Wang, Q., Kinetic and Radiative Extinctions of Spherical Diffusion Flames, M.Sc. Thesis, 
University of Hawaii (2007). 
http://hdl.handle.net/10125/20698 
4.  
Santa, K.J., Structure and Extinction of Spherical Diffusion Flames in Microgravity, M.Sc. 
Thesis, University of Hawaii (2006).   
https://scholarspace.manoa.hawaii.edu/items/8503612a-3fe9-4d76-926e-4b28e4732733 
3.  
Chen, R., Effects of Flame Structure on Soot Inception and Flame Extinction of Diffusion 
Flames, M.Sc. Thesis, Washington University (2003).  
2.  
Sun, Z., Numerical Investigation of Flame Synthesis Involving Multi-Component Aerosols, 
D.Sc. Dissertation, Washington University (2002).  
 
https://www.proquest.com/openview/1eba51c9ed20c4f81d6c5f7c8d621a58/ 
1. 
Liu, S., On Soot Inception in Nonpremixed Flames and the Effects of Flame Structure, Ph.D. 
Dissertation, University of Hawaii (2001). 
https://www.proquest.com/openview/54e315a455d4201fe315e3296f8743f5/ 
 
N.3 General ACME Papers and Presentations 
Conference Proceedings, Abstracts, Posters, Etc. 
20. 
Dennis P. Stocker, ACME: Advanced Combustion via Microgravity Experiments, Work-in-
Progress Poster, 13th U.S. National Combustion Meeting, College Station, TX, 19-22 March 
2023. 
19. 
Dennis P. Stocker, ACME: Advanced Combustion via Microgravity Experiments: ACME, 
Poster, 38th Annual Meeting of the American Society for Gravitational and Space Research, 
Houston, TX, 9-12 Nov. 2022. 
18. 
Michael Greshko, Cosmic Combustion, National Geographic Magazine, Oct. 2022, p. 22. 
www.nationalgeographic.com/science/article/in-space-flames-become-otherworldly 
(online version with different title and formatting) 

=== PAGE 103 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
103 
 
 
17. 
International Space Station Benefits for Humanity 2022, Report No. NP-2022-06-010-JSC, 
2022, pp. 117-118. 
www.nasa.gov/sites/default/files/atoms/files/iss_benefits_for_humanity_2022_book.pdf 
16. 
Dennis P. Stocker, Laminar Non-Premixed Flames of Gaseous Fuel Aboard the International 
Space Station, Spring Technical Meeting of The Central States Section of the Combustion 
Institute, Detroit, Mi, 15-17 May 2022, 10 pp. 
https://www1.grc.nasa.gov/wp-content/uploads/ACME-CSSCI-paper-20220402.pdf 
15. 
Doreen B. Zudell, Final Flames Ignited in Quest for Combustion’s Secrets, Aerospace 
Frontiers, May 2022, p 3. 
www.nasa.gov/sites/default/files/atoms/files/ps-03506-05_af_may_2022_508-sp.pdf 
14. 
Peter B. Sunderland, Transformative Combustion Research in the ACME Suite of ISS 
Experiments, 37th Annual Meeting of the American Society for Gravitational and Space 
Research, Baltimore MD, 3-6 Nov. 2021. 
13. 
Dennis P. Stocker, Recent Research on Flames of Gaseous Fuel Aboard the International 
Space Station, Conference of the Japanese Society of Microgravity Application (JASMAC-
33), virtual, 13-15 Oct. 2021, 11 pp. 
https://www1.grc.nasa.gov/wp-content/uploads/JASMAC-ACME-paper-20210921.pdf 
12. 
Dennis P. Stocker, Advanced Combustion via Microgravity Experiments on the International 
Space Station, Work-in-Progress Poster, 12th U.S. National Combustion Meeting, virtual, 24-
26 May 2021. 
https://www1.grc.nasa.gov/wp-content/uploads/PS-03403-ACME-on-the-ISS.pdf 
11. 
S. Pichugin, D. Samsonov, S. Frolov, O. Korobeinichev, A. Shmakov, Flames Investigations at 
ISS, Cosmonautics of XXI Century Conference, TSNIIMash, Moscow, Russia, 12-14 May 2021. 
10. 
On-site Work Underway With ACME, Aerospace Frontiers, Feb. 2021, p 8. 
https://www.nasa.gov/sites/default/files/atoms/files/aerospace-frontiers-feb-2021.pdf 
9. 
Sergey Pichugin, Oleg Artemiev, Sergey Prokopiev, Oleg Kononenko, Oleg Novitsky, and 
Sergey Frolov, Investigations at ISS on Combustion of Gas Mixtures. Sample Results and 
Technical Experience, XIII International Scientific and Practical Conference ‘Manned Flights 
in Space,’ Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Centre, Star City, Russia, 13-15 Nov. 2019. 
8. 
S. Jenise Veris, ACME Update: BRE Experiment Fired Up, Aerospace Frontiers, April 2019, p. 
12. 
https://www.nasa.gov/sites/default/files/atoms/files/aerospace-frontiers-april-2019.pdf 
7. 
Suite of Experiments Study Flame Behavior in Microgravity, Aerospace Frontiers, June 2017, 
pp. 1, 4-5. 
https://www.nasa.gov/sites/default/files/atoms/files/af_june2017.pdf 
6. 
S.A. Gokoglu, D.L. Dietrich, D.P. Stocker, P.V. Ferkul, S.L. Olson, M.C. Hicks, A Researcher’s 
Guide to: International Space Station Combustion Science, Report No. NP-2015-10-034-JSC, 
NASA ISS Program Science Office, Johnson Space Center, Houston, TX, USA, 2015, pp. 13-
18. 
https://www.nasa.gov/sites/default/files/atoms/files/np-2015-10-034-
jsc_combustion_in_reduced_gravity-iss-mini-book-011116-508.pdf 
 
 

=== PAGE 104 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
104 
 
 
5. 
D.P. Stocker, F. Takahashi, J.M. Hickman, and A.C. Suttles, Advanced Combustion via 
Microgravity Experiments: Planned International Space Station Research on Gaseous 
Flames, Work in Progress Poster, 35th International Symposium on Combustion, San 
Francisco, CA, 3-8 Aug. 2014. 
https://www1.grc.nasa.gov/wp-content/uploads/PS-01374-ACME-posterFinal.pdf 
4. 
D.P. Stocker, F. Takahashi, J.M. Hickman, and A.C. Suttles, Gaseous Non-Premixed Flame 
Research Planned for the International Space Station, Spring Technical Meeting of the 
Central States Section of the Combustion Institute, Tulsa, OK, 16–18 March 2014, 13 pp. 
https://www1.grc.nasa.gov/wp-content/uploads/ACME_CSSCI_2014_rev.pdf 
3. 
D.P. Stocker, F. Takahashi, and J.M. Hickman, Burner-Stabilized Gaseous Flames for the 
Combustion Integrated Rack, 29th Annual Meeting of the American Society for Gravitational 
and Space Research and 5th International Symposium for Physical Sciences in Space, 
Orlando, FL, 3-8 Nov. 2013. 
2. 
D.P. Stocker, F. Takahashi, P.V. Ferkul, and J.M. Hickman, Gaseous Laminar Diffusion Flames 
for the Combustion Integrated Rack, 28th Annual Meeting of the American Society for 
Gravitational and Space Research, New Orleans, LA, 28 Nov. to 2 Dec. 2012. 
1. 
T.F. O'Malley, W.A. Sheredy, and D.P. Stocker, Combustion Research on the International 
Space Station, 59th International Astronautical Congress 2008, Vol. 2, pp. 756-766 (2008). 
  
N.4 Awards 
In 2022, Flame Design Principal Investigator Rich Axelbaum was named a Senior Member of the 
National Academy of Inventors (NAI).  Per the site, “Senior Members are active faculty, scientists, and 
administrators with success in patents, licensing, and commercialization and have produced 
technologies that have brought or aspire to bring, real impact on the welfare of society.  They are 
rising stars who foster a spirit of innovation within their communities and institutions while educating 
and mentoring the next generation of inventors.”  As explained in his university’s press release and 
department’s 2022 brochure about this honor, “Axelbaum holds 10 patents and founded the startup 
company AP Material Inc., which commercialized a flame-synthesis technology to manufacture high-
purity nanopowders.” 
 

=== PAGE 105 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
105 
 
 
 
Cover of 2022 departmental brochure, where Axelbaum appears on the photo’s right  
with a NASA-loaned combustion chamber. 
. 

=== PAGE 106 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
106 
 
 
In 2021, Flame Design Co-Investigator Peter Sunderland was inducted as a Fellow of the Combustion 
Institute for his “significant contributions to understanding laminar flame dynamics and soot 
formation and oxidation.” 
 
Additional awards include the following, where images of the award certificate and journal cover from 
item #5 appear subsequently: 
5.  Award for Gravitational and Space Research Journal Cover, Flame Ignition in Space, Jan. 2021.  
4.  Third Prize, Art Competition, 5th U.S. Combustion Meeting, San Diego, 2007.  
3.  Finalist, Science and Engineering Visualization Challenge, National Science Foundation, 2006.  
2.  Third Prize, Art Competition, 30th International Symposium on Combustion, 2004.  
1.  Best-Paper Award, Northern Ohio section of AIAA, 2003. 
 
 
Certificate for the winning Flame Design entry, Flame Ignition in Space, in the 2020 Art Competition 
of the American Society for Gravitational and Space Research (ASGSR). 
 
 

=== PAGE 107 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
107 
 
 
 
Journal cover featuring Flame Ignition in Space, from the Flame Design experiment,  
which provides a close view of the hot-wire igniter tip and 6.35-mm porous spherical burner. 
 
 

=== PAGE 108 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
108 
 
 
N.5 Outreach 
NASA 
Project 
Scientist 
Dennis 
Stocker 
created 
the 
Space 
Flames 
Facebook 
page 
(www.facebook.com/space.flames) and Flickr site (https://www.flickr.com/photos/space-flames), 
where some entries are specific to Flame Design.  He continues to administer these sites, where most 
content thus far has been about the ACME project of which Flame Design is a part.  As an example of 
educational outreach, a simple board game related to the ACME’s spherical flames experiments can 
be downloaded from https://www1.grc.nasa.gov/space/iss-research/iss-fcf/cir/acme/downloads/.  
ACME fact sheets, papers, posters, and presentations providing a project overview and status can also 
be downloaded from that page.  Printed copies of fact sheets have been distributed at meetings of 
The Combustion Institute and the American Society for Gravitational and Space Research (ASGSR). 
 
The investigators, Washington University in St. Louis, and the University of Maryland promoted 
awareness of the Flame Design investigation, as can be seen by these examples: 
• 
Flame Design 
• 
Fires in Microgravity 
• 
‘Playing’ with fire (30 Sept. 2004) 
• 
UMD Experiments Launched into Orbit via SpaceX Capsule (6 June 2017) 
• 
Experiment designed by Washington University engineer launched on SpaceX (8 June 2017) 
• 
Flame design in space may lead to soot-free fire (9 May 2019) – one of 2019’s top-ten stories 
from the Washington University in St. Louis’ McKelvey School of Engineering 
• 
In the media: International Space Station experiments will search for key to soot-free flames 
(15 May 2019) 
• 
Engineering Momentum Magazine: Spring 2020 (cover story) 
• 
Unlocking the Mysteries of Fire ... in Space (10 Feb. 2021)  
• 
Fire Protection Experts Available to the Media (22 June 2021) 
• 
Sunderland Gives Invited Talk at ASGSR 2021 Symposium (5 Nov. 2021) 
 
NASA articles, etc. about the study (and ISS combustion research in general) can be seen in these 
examples: 
• 
Space Life and Physical Sciences Research and Applications SpaceX CRS-11 Payloads and 
Experiments (1 June 2017) 
• 
The Power of Studying Combustion on the ISS (13 March 2018) 
• 
Studying flames in microgravity is helping make combustion on Earth cleaner, and space safer, 
where the video can be downloaded from Designing Flames Aboard ISS 
• 
Astronaut Christina Koch’s Space Station Science Scrapbook (Flame Design set up seen at 
Keeping the Flames Burning, 3 Feb. 2020) 
• 
A Thousand Points of Light – On The International Space Station (16 July 2020) 
• 
2021 NASA Science calendar (May image) 
• 
Astronomy Picture of the Day: 2021 August 10 
• 
Studying Flames in Microgravity (23 Feb. 2022) 
• 
Space Station’s Quest for the Secrets of Fire (18 April 2022) 
• 
International Space Station Benefits for Humanity 2022 – ACME is briefly discussed on page 
117 of the publication, while page 188 features a Flame Design image 
 
Other stories about the investigation (and ISS combustion research in general) often resulted from 
the public engagement by the investigators and Dennis Stocker, where examples can be found here: 

=== PAGE 109 ===
ACME/Flame Design Final Report (2023) 
 
6 April 2023 
109 
 
 
• 
Science in St. Louis Seminar Series: Fire in Space (8 March 2018) 
• 
International Space Station (ISS) Combustion Experiments (15 Oct. 2018) 
• 
International Space Station experiments will search for key to soot-free flames (14 May 2019) 
• 
Lighting A Flame In Space Could Help Fuels Burn More Cleanly On Earth (21 May 2019) 
• 
Don’t Light a Fire on the International Space Station…Unless it’s for Science (at 1:03:06, 8 Jan. 
2020) 
• 
In space, flames become otherworldly (30 Aug. 2022) - while general to ACME, the photo 
collage was from 2019 normal-flame testing for Flame Design.  Despite its one-paragraph 
brevity, Sunderland and Stocker were both interviewed for this article which was published 
under the title Cosmic Combustion on page 22 of the Oct. 2022 issue of the National 
Geographic Magazine. 
 
Stocker is involved in a broad range of NASA educational outreach to students and teachers, Scouts 
of both genders, and the general public.  His primary outreach focus is the fundamentals of 
microgravity and human spaceflight, for example through microgravity design challenges which he 
helps create and administer. But he periodically addresses other topics, e.g., where he sometimes 
speaks on ‘NASA and the Science of Superman’ – for example at the Superman Celebration in 
Metropolis, IL.  In this regard, his NASA outreach is carried out locally, regionally, nationally, and 
online.  For example, he regularly presents on microgravity at Space Center Houston’s Space 
Exploration Educators Conference (SEEC).   He has exhibited the last five National Scout Jamborees, 
five national Boy Scout conferences, the last three national Girl Scout conventions, and the 2019 
World Scout Jamboree (which was held in the U.S.).  Stocker has been a key lead for the agency in 
NASA’s participation in these Scouting events, where as an example the latter outreach is visually 
described at www.nasa.gov/feature/stem/world-scout-jamboree.html. 
