
=== PAGE 1 ===
ACME/s-Flame – 30-Day Operation Accomplishments Report for ISS Increment 63 
 
1 
 
16 Dec. 2020 
30-day Operational Accomplishments Report  
… for the International Space Station (ISS) Increment 63 
 
ACME 
Advanced Combustion via Microgravity Experiments 
s-Flame 
Structure and Response of Spherical Diffusion Flames 
The s-Flame investigation is one of several independent experiments that are part of the ACME 
project, which uses a single modular set of hardware to carry out studies of flames burning 
gaseous fuels in the ISS’ Combustion Integrated Rack (CIR).  The first round of s-Flame tests was 
conducted during Increments 60 and 61, while the second round was conducted fully within 
Increment 63.  There were no tests conducted in Increment 62 because of limited crew availability. 
 
Prepared by the PI team and Dennis Stocker (dennis.p.stocker@nasa.gov), the ACME Project 
Scientist, who is the primary contact for s-Flame and ACME information. 
 
 
 
Principal Investigator (PI): 
Prof. C.K. (Ed) Law, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 
Co-Investigator (Co-I): 
Prof. Stephen D. Tse, Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ 
Lead collaborator: 
Dr. Vladimir V. Gubernov, P.N. Lebedev Physical Institute of the 
Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russia 
NASA Project Scientist (PS): Dennis P. Stocker, NASA Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, OH 
 
 
 
I.  Introduction 
Tests for the Structure and Response of Spherical Diffusion Flames (s-Flame) experiment were 
conducted in the Combustion Integrated Rack (CIR) on the International Space Station, as part of 
the Advanced Combustion via Microgravity Experiments (ACME) project.  The purpose of s-Flame 
is to advance the ability to predict the structure and dynamics, including extinction and 
instabilities, of both soot-free and sooty flames.  The results may contribute to the development 
of lean-burn engines for improved efficiency and reduced pollutant emissions here on Earth. 
 
The spherical flames are ignited at non-steady conditions and allowed to transition naturally 
towards steady-state or extinction.  Tests are conducted with various inert diluents in both the 
fuel and chamber (oxidizer) atmosphere.  The fuel gases include hydrogen and methane mixtures 
for soot-free flames, and ethylene for sooty flames.  One experimental objective is to identify the 
extinction limits for both radiative and chemical kinetic extinction, i.e., where the flame 
extinguishes from radiative heat loss or is “blown out,” respectively.  Another objective is to 
determine the existence, onset, and nature of pulsating instabilities that have been theoretically 
predicted to occur in flames with certain fuel/inert mixtures at near-limit conditions.  
 

=== PAGE 2 ===
ACME/s-Flame – 30-Day Operation Accomplishments Report for ISS Increment 63 
 
2 
 
More specifically, s-Flame has the following experimental objectives: 
A. Measure and characterize the transient structure (such as temperature and species 
distribution) of diffusion flames established at initially non-steady, spherical flame 
structures for mixtures of different H2/CH4/diluent ratios (soot-free) and different 
C2H4/diluent ratios (sooty), for different flow rates.  
B. Determine the quasi-steady convective/chemical-kinetic extinction limits (low system 
Damköhler numbers) and radiative/chemical-kinetic extinction limits (high system 
Damköhler numbers) for mixtures of different H2/CH4/diluent ratios (soot-free) and 
different C2H4/diluent ratios (sooty). 
A. Determine the existence (for different Zeldovich number, Ze), onset (as a function Da), 
and nature (i.e. mode, frequency, amplitude) of pulsating instabilities theoretically 
predicted to occur in transient spherical diffusion flames using fuel/diluent mixtures that 
are above a critical Lewis number, at near-limit conditions. 
 
As suggested by the experiment’s name, s-Flame features a spherically symmetric diffusion 
flame, which is generated by discharging a fuel gas from a porous spherical burner into a still 
oxygen/inert atmosphere in microgravity.  The one-dimensional nature of the system facilitates 
data acquisition, data reduction, and computational simulation. 
 
The space flight program consists of two main parts: (1) Mapping and characterization of the 
motion (e.g., expansion) of spherical diffusion flames subsequent to ignition and at extinction 
because of the finite-rate chemistry and radiative heat loss.  The study is focused on the thermal 
radiation, the adequacy of the detailed chemistry and transport submodels used in 
computational modeling, and the development of flame front instabilities that could modify the 
extinction boundaries.  (2) Studies of the response of characteristically sooty flames to ignition, 
the onset of soot in the expanding flames, the soot radiation, and the soot’s effects on the flame 
spread, extinction, and instability. 
 
Microgravity studies of flames allow for a range of simplifications and provide various advantages 
over normal-gravity studies.  For example, the natural flicker of flames, which is a buoyancy-
driven (i.e., gravity-driven) instability, is eliminated yielding quasi-steady flames in microgravity.  
Characteristic length scales are increased in microgravity flames facilitating analysis of the flame 
structure.  Momentum-dominated flames, which are important for most practical combustion 
systems, can be studied at low velocities to simplify analysis.  Microgravity flames tend to have a 
much stronger sensitivity to their atmosphere and exhibit a much broader range of 
characteristics than normal-gravity flames because of the near absence of buoyant entrainment.  
The long residence times in microgravity flames can lead to strong soot production, but many 
microgravity flames are soot free.  The absence of buoyancy makes microgravity flames 
advantageous for studies of limit and stability behavior where chemical kinetics are important.  
For example, chemi-ion species, electronically-excited chemiluminescent species, are at very low 
concentration in typical flames, making the reduced buoyancy environment valuable for 
evaluating the minor species chemistry.  With these advantages, microgravity testing can lead to 
new understanding of the complex nature of combustion – regardless of the gravitational 
environment of the combustion application. 

=== PAGE 3 ===
ACME/s-Flame – 30-Day Operation Accomplishments Report for ISS Increment 63 
 
3 
 
II.  Methods/Research Operations 
  
A. Discussion of Method/Protocol 
The s-Flame investigation and other ACME experiments are configured, but not 
conducted, by the ISS crew.  The crew’s role is to set up the hardware, gas bottles, etc. 
for each set of tests.  The most common changes include the gas bottles on the 
Combustion Integrated Rack (CIR) and the mass flow controllers on the modular ACME 
chamber insert. 
 
All testing is commanded from the ground, specifically from the Glenn ISS Payload 
Operations Center (GIPOC).  The science portion of the tests were all conducted in a 
nominally automated mode using pre-programmed scripts.  As expected, no s-Flame tests 
were conducted in a ‘manual’ mode, where changes are made to a control parameter in 
response to the analog video downlink and the numerical data available in the telemetry 
stream.  Thus far, that has been the case for all ACME tests, with the mundane exception 
of ‘manually’ halting the test after the flame has extinguished or perhaps if a temperature 
has reached a critical value. 
 
Testing is not conducted when thrusters fire or spacecraft dock or undock from ISS to 
ensure an acceptable acceleration environment. 
 
Data is downlinked between each set of tests, i.e., day of testing, to allow for preliminary 
analysis and requisite planning for subsequent testing. 
 
 
III.  Results 
A. Baselined Activities Completed – Pre-flight, In-flight, Post-Flight 
A total of 276 flames were ignited for the s-Flame experiment, with 29, 116, and 131 
respectively ignited during Increments 60, 61, and 63.  These numbers neglect some 
flames which quenched promptly after ignition.  In this regard, science testing began at 
the end of Increment 60 and the first round of tests were completed during Increment 
61.  No tests were conducted in Increment 62 due to a lack of crew time, where the 
second round of tests were fully conducted during Increment 63. 
 
The tests were conducted in two rounds, where the first was conducted in increments 60 
and 61 featured 145 flames (nominally) in which the fuel and oxygen (i.e., in the chamber 
atmosphere) were diluted with nitrogen.  The second round conducted in increment 63 
featured 131 flames (nominally) in which the fuel and oxygen were instead diluted with 
helium.   
 
The s-Flame experiment does not have living subjects like a life science experiment, but 
the tests are independently conducted with various gaseous fuels, including hydrogen, 

=== PAGE 4 ===
ACME/s-Flame – 30-Day Operation Accomplishments Report for ISS Increment 63 
 
4 
 
methane, hydrogen/methane blends, and ethylene.  These are simple hydrocarbon gases 
for which the chemistry is relatively well understood. 
 
No samples (e.g., of soot) were collected for s-Flame; all of the ISS results were 
electronically transmitted to the ground.  That is furthermore the case for all currently 
planned ACME experiments. 
 
A summary log of the flames ignited for s-Flame, including a limited overview of the test 
conditions, is found in Table 1. 
 
Table 1. Flames ignited for the s-Flame experiment 
Test 
Day1 
Year Month Date 
Atmosphere2 
Fuel bottle 
Flames 
ignited3 
First round of tests, with nitrogen-diluted fuel and oxygen 
19254 
2019 
9 
11 
~21% O2 with N2 
50% C2H4 with N2 
13 
19256 
13 
16 
19304 
10 
31 
45% CH4 with N2 
9 
19308 
11 
4 
~30% O2 with N2 
21 
19352 
12 
18 
~21% O2, with N2 
100% H2 
10 
20006 
2020 
1 
6 
44.4% H2 with CH4 
17 
20013 
13 
66.7% H2 with CH4 
22 
20024 
24 
100% H2 
16 
20029 
29 
50% C2H4 with N2 
21 
First round of tests, with helium-diluted fuel and oxygen 
20132 
2020 
5 
11 
~21% O2 with He 
25% H2, 20% CH4, 
with He 
7 
20136 
15 
20% H2, 25% CH4, 
with He 
11 
20142 
21 
~30% O2 with He 
30% H2, 15% CH4, 
with He 
17 
20155 
6 
3 
~30% and ~21% O2 
with He 
45% H2 with He 
9 
20160 
8 
45% CH4 with He 
12 
20164 
12 
~30% O2 with He 
20% C2H4 with He 
11 
20170 
18 
~30% and ~21% O2 
with He 
25% C2H4 with He 
20 
20176 
24 
30% C2H4 with He 
23 
20190 
7 
8 
45% H2 with He 
21 
1Test Day includes the year as the first two digits followed by the 3-digit day of the year. 
2Atmosphere is ~1 atm but pressure increases and O2% drops with vitiation.  
3Flames ignited is the number of nominally sustained flames ignited on that day 
(neglecting the day change on ISS). 
 
Pre-flight and post-flight activities are generally not addressed in this report. 
 
 

=== PAGE 5 ===
ACME/s-Flame – 30-Day Operation Accomplishments Report for ISS Increment 63 
 
5 
 
B. List of Preflight, In-flight, Postflight Anomalies 
1. Mission anomalies  
While there were certainly issues with testing discussed in the next section, there 
were no significant anomalies during s-Flame’s Increment 63 testing.  However, 
anomalies did occur during Increment 60 and 61 which led to corrective actions 
and/or make-up testing. 
 
2. Any other difficulties in obtaining scientific data   
Ignition of the flames presented a significant challenge to the experiment during this 
increment.  All of the flame tests were conducted where the fuel and chamber 
atmosphere were both diluted with helium rather than the nitrogen used in 
Increments 60 and 61.  The two gases’ properties are dramatically different making 
comparison testing very desirable for manifestation of different phenomena.  
Helium’s thermal conductivity is notably several times greater than that of nitrogen, 
so considerably more energy and power was required to ignite the flames.  The power 
level was slowly increased from test to test until ignition was finally achieved on the 
ninth test, where only seven flames were ignited of the 15 tests conducted on May 11 
(20132), the first day for flames in Increment 63.  The cautious approach was taken 
because of concerns that the igniter tip might fail (i.e., burn out) if too much power 
was applied.  An igniter failure would have likely halted testing for weeks given the 
need to schedule the commander’s time to replace the igniter tip. 
 
After that first test day, the decision was made to have the igniter replaced with a coil 
rather than loop design which was believed to be more robust because of the thicker 
wire.  Furthermore, the igniter tip had not been replaced in months, and the tips do 
degrade with time, especially when they are not quickly retracted from the ignited 
flames.  The coil igniter was used successfully but still with caution, where flames were 
not always ignited successfully.  Subsequently, some tests were conducted in 
atmosphere with ~30% oxygen (by volume) instead of the planned ~21%.  As one 
would expect, that proved to be helpful for achieving ignition.   But the end result was 
that some tests were conducted with 21% oxygen, some at 30%, and some at both 
nominal concentrations.  Fortuitously, this mixture of conditions may provide deeper 
insight into the mechanisms of flame dynamics and response. 
 
Tests are also unsuccessful when the flame fails to ignite, where that occurred, for 
example, during Increment 61 in tests 19304A4, 19304A6, 19308C1, and 20006A1.  
That can be corrected by adjusting various test parameters and other settings.  In this 
case, adjustments were subsequently made to the ignition position (e.g., after 
19304A4 and 19304A6), the relative timing of the fuel flow and igniter activation (e.g., 
after 19308C1), and the duration of the igniter activation (e.g., after 20006A1).  As 
another example, failed ignition can result from false ignition detection and 
deactivation resulting from the combination of settings for ignition and detection, 
e.g., the gain for the Photomultiplier Tube (PMT) module measuring the OH* 
chemiluminescence.  The latter, in the ultraviolet at 310 nm, is a good indicator of an 

=== PAGE 6 ===
ACME/s-Flame – 30-Day Operation Accomplishments Report for ISS Increment 63 
 
6 
 
ignited flame rather than the glowing igniter, which emits primarily in the infrared and 
visible spectrum. 
 
Testing on June 3 (20155) was cut short due to a combination of issues.  The final test 
was aborted due to an error with an Image Processing and Storage Unit (IPSU).  
Consoles needed to be reset for the new increment, and there was an issue with the 
Fuel Oxidizer Management Assembly (FOMA) Control Unit, i.e. the FCU.  Rebooting 
the FCU inadvertently set the valve safety timers to zero, which cannot be reset 
without venting and refilling the combustion chamber with the intended atmosphere.  
Those issues combined with an extended loss of commanding prevented further 
science operations on that day.  Therefore, an additional test day (July 8, i.e., 20190) 
was added to make up for lost science, e.g., where only one test was successfully 
conducted at ~21% oxygen on June 3.   The FCU was off nominal because of a high 
carrier gas pressure in the Gas Chromatograph Instrumentation Package (GCIP).  
Imaging of the hydrogen flames was often an issue, where they were not apparent or hardly 
visible to the operations camera and ACME DataCam, where the latter is the primary camera 
for ACME testing.  The testing with the extremely dim flames was limited to that conducted 
on Dec. 18 (19352), Jan. 24 (20024), June 3 (20155), and July 8 (20190).  This shortcoming 
unfortunately inhibits assessment of the three-dimensional flame symmetry as the two 
intensified cameras were opposite of each other. 
 
The flow ranges of the selected Mass Flow Controllers (MFCs) was found to be a 
challenge, where it was discovered that the goal of studying both kinetic and radiative 
extinction was not always satisfactorily achieved because of flow rate constraints.  
 
At high flow rates, the burner does not produce spherically symmetric flames.  While 
nominally spherical at moderate flow rates, the flame’s center becomes increasing 
offset from the burner center.  More specifically, the flame is shifted toward the 
supply tube indicating that the sintered attachment of the porous sphere to the 
supply tube is more ‘open’ than the pores of the spherical burner.  In other words, the 
flow from the burner is not spherically symmetric.  At sufficiently high flow rates, the 
flame becomes obviously non-spherical, where it can appear to be ellipsoidal or even 
parabolic in shape.  In the latter case, the flame locally quenches near the supply tube. 
 
When at a small fraction of the maximum flow rate, Mass Flow Controller (MFC) 
performance has been seen to be poor during s-Flame testing, i.e., where actual flow 
rate differed from that desired.  However, this was not a surprise to those familiar 
with the hardware. 
 
Flow perturbations have been noticed in some s-Flame tests, where ACME’s MFCs 
used to control the flow of fuel, nitrogen, and oxidizer have unfortunately not always 
performed satisfactorily.  In tests conducted using the 1-slpm fuel MFC (where the 
flow range is on a nitrogen basis), the flow has been seen to overshoot and 
undershoot when first opening.  Small flow irregularities have been most apparent 

=== PAGE 7 ===
ACME/s-Flame – 30-Day Operation Accomplishments Report for ISS Increment 63 
 
7 
 
through their effect on the Photomultiplier Tube (PMT) measurements, e.g., of OH* 
and CH* chemiluminescence.  A momentary increase in fuel flow, as has occurred in 
some s-Flame tests, naturally leads to increased light from the flame. The MFCs are 
tested - without flames - after they are first installed.  Adjustments are typically made 
to (1) the setting that controls when the valves open and (2) the Proportional-Integral-
Derivative (PID) settings.  This ACME activity has involved significant testing, where 
there is an assortment of MFCs with different flow ranges for each of the three gas 
types.  While the MFC adjustments have been beneficial, they have not eliminated all 
gas flow problems.  It was seen in prior ACME testing that nitrogen oscillations (if any) 
tend to damp with time, so a nitrogen pre-flow can be used so that such oscillations 
might end before the flame is ignited.  As another measure, the MFCs are re-zeroed 
prior to each test, where that was another measure adopted in earlier ACME testing. 
 
As mentioned previously, s-Flame tests have sometimes automatically aborted 
(because of the controlling software script), where that is normally prior to gas flow 
and the activation of the igniter – which is typical for other ACME experiments.  As a 
result, there was little lost other than the available experimental time in the failed test 
attempt.  ACME aborts normally occur because of communication issues with an IPSU, 
which for example happened for tests 19304A5, 19352D3, 19352P1, 20024N1, and 
20024J1.   A few other tests aborted because flow rates were accidentally specified 
outside of the range of the installed mass flow controller(s), where that included for 
example 19352A1, 19352D2, and 20013C2.  ACME aborts are infrequent, but there 
are sometimes days when they occur repeatedly as can be seen here.  
 
C. Completeness/Quality of Data 
During Increments 60 and 61, nine days of tests were conducted during which 145 flames 
were ignited for the first round of testing.  In contrast, only 29 tests were specified as 
required or highly desired in the ACME Integrated Science Requirements Document 
(ISRD) for that round.  Therefore, a wealth of data was obtained for this round of testing 
which featured gaseous fuels diluted by nitrogen. 
 
However, there was a significant loss of data.  Most importantly, the first fuel bottle 
appeared to leak on installation (in Increment 60) and later on-orbit testing (in Increment 
61) with other hydrogen/methane blends suggests that its fuel mixture would have been 
ideal for achieving science success.  Furthermore, there was significant image data loss 
on two different test days, specifically Sept. 13 (19256) and Dec. 18 (19352).  As a result, 
those test days were nominally repeated on Jan. 29 (20029) and Jan. 24 (20024), 
respectively (i.e., in a reversed order).  For these reasons, a simple comparison of the total 
number of flames ignited (145) with that specified as required or highly desired (29) for 
the first round of testing is somewhat misleading. 
 
As discussed in the preceding section, the hydrogen and diluted-hydrogen flames were 
not apparent or extremely dim in imaging from the operations camera and ACME 
DataCam.  Neglecting that factor, the cameras are sensitive to radiation where pixels 

=== PAGE 8 ===
ACME/s-Flame – 30-Day Operation Accomplishments Report for ISS Increment 63 
 
8 
 
gradually become ‘hot’ (i.e., dead) over time.  While these bright spots are addressed in 
image post-processing, they are a degradation of the image quality. 
 
It is possible that the tests are subtly affected by the acceleration environment, but there 
is not obvious indication of this; and it has thus far not been evaluated with available 
measurements from the Space Acceleration Measurement System (SAMS).  
 
D. Status of Data Analysis [provided by Prof. Stephen Tse, Rutgers U.] 
Image files are currently being processed.  Radial positions of maximum CH* 
chemiluminescence is being plotted against time.  Different radii are being considered 
and plotted together, as some flames are not completely symmetric.  MFC and PMT data 
are being compared with video images to assess and confirm experimental settings.  
Radiometer data is being reviewed.  Analyses of the fiber pyrometry data are ongoing. 
MATLAB code is used to isolate fiber images, which are then color assessed for 
temperature. 
 
Computational simulations with detailed chemistry and transport of the test cases are 
underway.  Time-dependent simulations will be compared with the time-dependent 
experimental data, where tracking of the flamefront location is based on 
chemiluminescent emission.  Steady-state simulations will produce the Isola curves 
mapping flame response versus system Damkhöler number for given fuel mixtures.  The 
experimental cases will then be pin-pointed on the computational mappings to assess 
whether the experimental conditions are in quasi-steady state or near extinction limits, 
either kinetic or radiative.  Oscillation behavior will be correlated to possible pulsating 
oscillations found in the simulations. 
 
E. Preliminary Research Findings [provided by Prof. Tse and lightly edited by Stocker] 
The s-Flame experiment utilizes spherically-symmetric diffusion flames and their 
dynamics and responses to investigate fundamental processes, such as extinction, 
instability, and soot formation. 
 
The tests conducted on 19254 (near the end of Increment 60) revealed that a quasi-steady 
flame could be attained for extended duration at low flow rate, i.e., 3 cc/s for 20% 
C2H4/80% N2 (on a volume basis).  The flame was shut down by the automated system 
because the burner reached a cut-off temperature of 250°C.  Although the flame 
oscillated near the end of the test, it was likely due to influence of the burner tube.  
Comparisons with computation simulations will help to clarify the involved processes.  For 
higher flow rates, e.g., 5-10 cc/s, with the same mixture, radiative extinctions were 
observed.  Generally, the flames showed unstable behavior near the burner tube prior to 
extinction, likely because of lack of fuel mixture and heat loss in that region.  Other 
mixtures, e.g., 25% C2H4/75% N2 and 30% C2H4/70% N2, also showed radiative extinctions 
at higher flow rates.  For some cases, the pyrometry fiber interacted with the flame, 
allowing determination of temperature in on-going analyses.  Soot was observed only 

=== PAGE 9 ===
ACME/s-Flame – 30-Day Operation Accomplishments Report for ISS Increment 63 
 
9 
 
during ignition, which went away as the flame established itself.  To assess whether these 
nitrogen-diluted ethylene flames are non-sooty or sooty, cases were run where mixtures 
were ignited and established at low flow rates (e.g., 3 cc/s) with low ethylene contents 
(e.g., 25-30% C2H4) and then ramped to high flow rates (e.g., 5-10 cc/s) with higher 
ethylene contents (e.g., 40-50% C2H4).  The flames all radiatively extinguished, but no 
sooting was observed.  Observations of such radiative extinction behavior at high flow 
rates is an achievement because such phenomenon was not observed in our ground-
based studies, given the limited microgravity durations.  Radiative reabsorption extends 
flame size at extinction.  In ISS testing, radiative extinction has been found to be a 
common event, which was predicted computationally, but not observed previously for 
our flame conditions. 
 
The 19256 tests (in Increment 60) were aimed at examining kinetic extinction.  Similar to 
the radiative extinction cases, sufficient microgravity duration is needed to observe 
kinetic extinction because a near steady flame needs to be established first, before ramp 
down in flow rate to find properly the chemical kinetic extinction limit.  High flow rate 
cases (e.g., 13.5 cc/s, 15 cc/s) showed asymmetrical flames which radiatively 
extinguished.  Flow rates were lowered so that quasi-steady flames could be established 
before ramp down in flow rate.  The 15% C2H4 mixtures were not strong enough to sustain 
a quasi-steady flame at 3 cc/s before ramp down.  However, for stronger mixtures, i.e., 
20-30% C2H4, very nice flames were established at 3 cc/s; and kinetic extinctions were 
observed during ramp down before reaching 1 cc/s.  Radiative extinctions for ramp up 
cases were also examined.  Similarly, for stronger mixtures, i.e., 20-30% C2H4, very nice 
flames were established at 3 cc/s; and radiative extinctions were observed during ramp 
up before reaching 8 cc/s. 
 
Testing on 19304 investigated 45% CH4/55% N2 mixtures issuing into an air atmosphere.  
The results indicated that the flow rates specified by the fuel MFC (0.5 slpm) were in the 
regime of kinetic extinction.  Quasi-steady flames could not be established.  Furthermore, 
larger flow rates could not be provided by the MFC, so observations of radiative extinction 
could not be achieved.  Even with a larger capacity MFC, characteristically larger flames 
would be expected to be asymmetric.  As such, nitrogen-diluted methane flames were 
planned to be reexamined in increased oxygen atmosphere, i.e., 30% O2/70% N2. 
 
Consequently, the 19308 tests investigated nitrogen-diluted methane flames in 30% 
O2/70% N2 atmosphere.  Various methane concentrations from 45% down to 15% were 
examined.  For 45% CH4/55% N2, relatively long duration flames of ~15 s and ~10 s were 
established at flow rates of 2 cc/s and 3 cc/s, respectively.  At larger flow rates of 5 and 
9.4 cc/s, the flames expanded to large radii and then extinguished.  These flames 
appeared to demonstrate radiative extinction.  Reduction of flow rate from 2 cc/s to 1 
cc/s resulted in extinction during ramp down, indicating kinetic extinction.  For 30% 
CH4/70% N2, flow rates of 3, 5, and 10 cc/s produced flames that expanded to extinction 
(assumed radiatively); while reduction of flow rate from 3 to 1 cc/s resulted in presumably 
kinetic extinction during ramp down.  For 25% CH4/75% N2, flow rates of 5 and 10 cc/s 

=== PAGE 10 ===
ACME/s-Flame – 30-Day Operation Accomplishments Report for ISS Increment 63 
 
10 
 
yielded flames that expanded to extinction.  For 20% CH4/80% N2, constant flow rate of 
10 cc/s created a flame that expanded until extinction (assumed radiatively); while 
reduction of flow rate from 10 cc/s to 1 cc/s resulted in wavering extinction during ramp 
down, suggesting kinetic extinction.  For 15% CH4/85% N2, flames were ignited, but 
extinguished very quickly.  These tests of 19308 suggest that they could manifest both 
radiative and kinetic extinction for the conditions specified. 
 
The 19352 tests examined various concentrations of H2 (45%-70%) diluted with N2 issuing 
into air.  The installed fuel MFC had a maximum output of 0.1 slpm, which unfortunately 
provided a less-than-sufficient flow range where its use may have precluded the study of 
radiative extinction corresponding to larger flame sizes.  Imaging the diluted hydrogen 
flames was a challenge, especially since the hobj image files from the ACME DataCam 
were mis-formatted.  Furthermore, little could be seen in the analog ops imaging, e.g., 
where it, like the DataCam and Cool Flames Investigation (CFI) intensified camera, cannot 
image the ultraviolet OH* flame emission (at 310 nm).  Analysis of images from the Low 
Light Level Ultraviolet (LLL-UV) camera and its OH* filter is ongoing.  And as one might 
expect, little could be seen with the CFI intensified camera using its broadband CH2O filter.  
Quasi-steady flames seem to be present at low flow rates (e.g., 2.4 cc/s for 70% H2), as 
inferred from PMT, pyrometry fiber emission, and burner temperature observations.  
Kinetic extinction seems to occur as the flow rate is ramped down.  There were various 
problems with the IPSU and some tests aborted.  Using the 100% H2 bottle with a higher 
flow rate MFC was later performed for tests of 20024 (see below), which was a make-up 
test day added because of the mis-formatting of the DataCam image files. 
 
The tests conducted on 20006, using the 44.4% H2/55.6% CH4 bottle, examined 20% 
H2/25% CH4/55% N2 mixtures issuing into air.  Flames extinguished, some with wavy 
oscillating behavior prior to extinction.  However, it seems that even for very small flow 
rates, e.g., 2 cc/s, extinction was by the radiative mechanism during flame 
expansion.  There was too little parameter room in terms of flow rate and burner size to 
identify conclusively kinetic extinction during ramp down for these mixtures.  In short, 
radiative extinction (with local flame extinction and re-ignition seemed to occur prior to 
ultimate extinguishment) during flame expansion after ignition was observed.  However, 
it is unclear whether ramping down the flow rate resulted in kinetic extinction.  Detailed 
analyses of the data are needed.  The various cameras seemed to capture the tests well. 
 
The 20013 tests, which used the 66.7% H2/33.3% CH4 bottle, mainly investigated 30% 
H2/15% CH4/55% N2 mixtures issuing into air.  Radiative extinction was difficult to identify 
conclusively because flames with larger flow rates, e.g. 15 cc/s, seemed to last, although 
with patchy extinction areas, until time out.  Larger flow rates could not be examined 
either because of limited MFC range or distorted flame shape cause by burner limitations 
at high flow rates.  Also, kinetic extinction during ramp down could not be identified 
conclusively, as some flames seemed to extinguish because they were "going into the 
burner." 
 

=== PAGE 11 ===
ACME/s-Flame – 30-Day Operation Accomplishments Report for ISS Increment 63 
 
11 
 
The 20024 tests using the 100% H2 bottle repeated and augmented conditions for those 
of 19352 where the 0.1-slpm fuel MFC range was too low to examine radiative extinction 
and the analog and intensified cameras did not pick up the flame images at all or well.  
Here, the 0.5-slpm fuel MFC was used and only a fused silica filter was used for the Cool 
Flames Investigation (CFI) intensified camera.  45%-15% H2/N2 balance mixtures were 
investigated.  The flames at high flow rates, e.g., 10 cc/s, did not extinguish, appearing 
quasi-steady until time out.  The pyrometry fibers glowed, perhaps making good flame-
structure measurements, which will be evaluated subsequently.  The flames seemed to 
extinguish during ramp down, but further analysis is needed to assess kinetic extinction. 
 
The tests conducted on 20029 used 50% C2H4/50% N2 and repeated and augmented 
conditions of 19256, when the images were not good.  Again, the results indicated both 
kinetic and radiative extinction phenomena under corresponding conditions.  However, 
no sooting flames were established, necessitating 100% C2H4 and an enriched oxygen 
atmosphere to facilitate sooting behavior in possible future tests. 
 
The 20132 tests kicked off a round of tests with helium-diluted fuel and oxidizer.  The 
ambient was 21% O2 and 79% He.  The fuel was composed of 25% H2, 20% CH4, and 55% 
He.  Using He as inert made igniting the mixture much more difficult compared to that for 
the N2 inert cases of Round 1, using the same ignition parameters.  The reason is believed 
to be due to the 6X higher value in thermal conductivity of He versus that of N2.  As a 
result, ignition parameters were varied, e.g., with a longer preheat time and higher 
power, to achieve ignition for the He-diluted mixtures and ambient.  The tests produced 
flames at 3, 5, 7, and 10 cc/s that expanded outwardly quickly and extinguished.  For 5, 7, 
and 10 cc/s, the flames seemed to disappear and 're-ignite' with a "flash" before final 
extinction.   We are currently investigating the flash phenomenon.  Moreover, the 
radiation mechanism is not conclusive, as it appears different than for the N2-diluted 
cases.  We did not have a chance to examine lowering of flow rates to assess kinetic 
extinction. 
 
The 20136 tests examined 20% H2/25% CH4/55% He issuing into 21% O2/He.  For 5 cc/s 
and 7 cc/s, the mixture ignites but immediately extinguishes, with almost no observable 
flame-front expansion.  For 10, 13, 15, and 17.5 cc/s, the mixtures ignite, expand quickly, 
and extinguish.  We believe that the extinction mechanism is radiative and will compare 
with computational simulations.  For the cases with a ramp down in flow rate, the flames 
seemed to extinguish before ramp down.  Thus, we were not able to assess purely kinetic 
extinction.  Ignition parameters were varied to investigate thresholds for igniting the 
mixture for different flow rates.  Only flow rates above 7 cc/s showed flame-front 
expansion leading to extinction, with 17.5 cc/s showing a flash or wavering of the flame 
before final extinction. 
 
The tests conducted on 20142 investigated 30% H2/15% CH4/55% He issuing into 30% 
O2/He.  Elevated oxygen was approved for study, since ignition and extinction limits in 
previous testing were affected by the high thermal conductivity of He.  For 5, 7, 10, 15, 

=== PAGE 12 ===
ACME/s-Flame – 30-Day Operation Accomplishments Report for ISS Increment 63 
 
12 
 
13, and 16.5 cc/s flow rates, nice flames were established that expanded to 
wavy/oscillating extinction at the end, indicative of radiative extinction.  For the cases 
with a ramp down in flow rate, the flames seemed to extinguish during the ignition flow 
rate stage before ramp down.  Thus, we were not able to assess kinetic extinction. 
 
The 20155 tests examined 45% H2/55% He issuing into 30% O2/He and 21% O2/He.  
Previous tests using He as inert had shown that much larger energy and power are needed 
to ignite the mixtures.  For the 30% O2/H2 atmosphere, the tests produced flames at 10 
and 14 cc/s (MFC limit of 1 SLMP) that expanded after ignition, but were extinguished by 
the automated protocol because the burner reached the 250°C temperature limit before 
any self-extinction could occur.  The flames were not too large at the end.  Presumably, 
the thermally-conductive He diluent facilitates heat transfer to the burner.  For the cases 
with a ramp down in flow rate, i.e., starting at 10 and 14 cc/s and ramping down, the 
flames seemed to self-extinguish during ramp down.  Flow rate at 5 cc/s results in flames 
that only existed briefly.  Extinction at this lower flow rate is probably due to heat loss to 
the burner, rather than pure kinetic extinction.  Ramp down from 14 cc/s towards 5 cc/s 
resulted in the burner reaching the 250°C limit during ramp down.  More analyses are 
needed.  Tests at 21% O2/He atmosphere were limited.  Fuel flow of 5 cc/s showed flash 
ignition, but no sustained flame.  Meanwhile, 10 cc/s resulted in a flame that seemed to 
expand to self-extinction. 
 
Testing on 20160 investigated 45% CH4/55% He issuing into 30% O2/He and 21% O2/He.  
Without H2 in the mixture, even larger energy and power were needed to ignite the 
mixtures.  For the 30% O2/H2 atmosphere, the 5, 10, and 15 cc/s flow rates were sooty 
only at ignition; and the subsequent non-sooty flames expanded to self-extinction.  At 3 
and 4 cc/s, the mixtures flashed at ignition, and extinguished almost immediately.  It was 
not clear whether extinction was due to kinetic extinction or heat loss to the burner.  At 
6 and 7 cc/s, flames ignited with less soot, expanding with no soot to self-extinction.  The 
case with a ramp down in flow rate could not conclusively identify kinetic extinction.  
More analysis is needed.  Tests at 21% O2/He atmosphere needed even more energy and 
power for ignition.  At 5, 7, 10, and 15 cc/s, flames ignited with soot, and expanded quickly 
to extinction. 
 
The 20164 tests began study of ethylene-based flames, where 20% C2H4/80% He issued 
into 30% O2/He and 21% O2/He atmospheres.  For 5 cc/s, the flame expanded and 
remained quasi-steady until the burner limit temperature (250°C) was reached.  At 6, 7, 
10, and 15 cc/s, the flames expanded to extinction, with the higher flow rates (i.e., 10 and 
15 cc/s) exhibiting sooty ignition.  Fuel flow of 5.5 cc/s seemed to correspond to a 
condition where the onset of oscillating extinction was simultaneous with the burner 
reaching the 250°C temperature limit.  For the cases with a ramp down in flow rate, the 
flames seemed to extinguish during ramp down, but heat loss to the burner may be the 
mechanism of extinction.  Although 13 tests were conducted with the 21% O2/He 
atmosphere, ignition was not achieved. 
 

=== PAGE 13 ===
ACME/s-Flame – 30-Day Operation Accomplishments Report for ISS Increment 63 
 
13 
 
The tests performed on20170 investigated 25% C2H4/75% He issuing into 30% O2/He and 
21% O2/He.  At 5 and 5.5 cc/s, nice blue chemiluminescent flames were ignited, but 
eventually were cut off because of the burner temperature limit being reached.  At 6 cc/s, 
a nice blue flame was ignited which expanded slowly to extinction.  At 7, 10, and 15 cc/s, 
sooty ignition occurred, but as the flames expanded, the soot went away, eventually 
resulting in radiative extinction.  By ramping the flow rates up, starting at 5 cc/s, soot at 
ignition was minimized, and the flames could expand to extinction.  Ramp down of the 
flow rate resulted in almost immediate extinction.  For tests at 21% O2/He atmosphere, 
cases at 5, 10, and 15 cc/s resulted in flames that expanded quickly to extinction.  Less 
soot was present at ignition compared with that for the 30% O2/He atmosphere cases.  
Consistent ignition was not always achieved for the same conditions, which is puzzling. 
 
Testing on 20176 explored 30% C2H4/70% He issuing into 30% O2/He and 21% O2/He.  At 
5 cc/s, a long duration flame was established that eventually reached the burner 
temperature limit.  At 6, 7, 10, and 15 cc/s, the flames were sooty at ignition, but the soot 
dissipated; and they expanded to extinction.  Ramping up the flow rates, starting at 5 cc/s, 
minimized soot at ignition and resulted in flames that slowly expanded to extinction.  For 
tests at 21% O2/He atmosphere, cases at 5, 10, and 15 cc/s resulted in flames that 
expanded to extinction.  At 4 cc/s, the flame lasted a while before eventual extinction.  
The 3 cc/s case did not ignite.  Ramp down of the flow rate seemed to result in flames 
that extinguished quickly before the protocol could ramp down the flow rate. 
 
The last testing of Round 2, which was a makeup of 20155, occurred on 20190, with 45% 
H2/55% He issuing into 30% O2/He and 21% O2/He.  For both oxygen concentration 
environments, flow rates resulting in expanding flames lasted for a while, but were cut 
off by automated protocol before self-extinction when the burner temperature limit was 
reached.  As for cases where the flow rates were ramped down, extinction detection was 
observed for both oxygen concentration environments.  We are currently analyzing the 
data to determine if extinction was kinetic or due to heat loss to the burner.  A last set of 
tests were conducted with a reduced oxygen concentration atmosphere, i.e., 17.5% 
O2/82.5% He.  Some cases indicated that radiative and kinetic extinction were possibly 
observed. 
 
In summary, selected preliminary findings from this testing include: 
o Cases run for nitrogen-diluted methane and ethylene flames and in air seemed to 
indicate kinetic extinction at low flow rates and radiative extinction at high flow 
rates.  As previously mentioned above (and in our report for the preceding 
increment pair), such phenomena were not observed in our ground-based 
research, given the limited microgravity durations.  Nevertheless, comparisons 
with computational simulations are needed to assess better the extinction 
behavior. 
o Cases run for nitrogen-diluted hydrogen flames seemed to show kinetic extinction 
at ramp down.  However, for the mass flow rates that could be accommodated, 
radiative extinction was not observed.   

=== PAGE 14 ===
ACME/s-Flame – 30-Day Operation Accomplishments Report for ISS Increment 63 
 
14 
 
o Cases run for nitrogen-diluted hydrogen/methane mixture flames manifested 
extinction, which are presumed to be radiative.  However, kinetic extinction at low 
flow rates could not be identified.  More analyses of the data are needed. 
o Cases for helium-diluted cases shifted the extinction limits with respect to the 
nitrogen-diluted cases.  In general, kinetic extinction was difficult to observe for 
the conditions examined.  More analyses are needed to assess instability near the 
flame limits, which was predicted to occur computationally. 
 
Early ISS results were presented in the following presentations: 
1. Chung K. Law and Stephen Tse, “ACME - s-Flame,” ISS Increments 61 & 62 Science 
Symposium, 17-19 Sept. 2019.  (oral presentation) 
2. Stephen D. Tse, Jonathan Shi, Delin Zhu, and Chung K. Law, “Dynamics of Burner-
Generated Spherical Diffusion Flames In Microgravity,” 35th Annual Meeting of 
the American Society for Gravitational and Space Research, Denver, CO, 20-23 
Nov. 2019. (poster presentation) 
3. Jonathan Shi, Stephen D. Tse, Dennis Stocker, and Chung K. Law, “ISS Experiments 
of Gaseous Spherical Diffusion Flames,” 36th Annual Meeting of the American 
Society for Gravitational and Space Research, 5-6 Nov. 2020. (pre-recorded oral 
presentation)  
  
F. Communication Imagery 
1. Still Imagery 
Photos are available online at www.flickr.com/photos/space-flames.  Although the 
Facebook page at www.facebook.com/space.flames is meant to provide updates on 
ACME and related combustion research, it is good source for recent photos, e.g., of 
flames, that may not be available on the Flickr site.  Additional photographs may be 
requested from the Project Scientist, Dennis Stocker (dennis.p.stocker@nasa.gov).  
 
2. Video 
‘The Power of Studying Combustion on the ISS,’ which was developed with input from 
the ACME Project Scientist, is available at https://science.nasa.gov/science-
news/news-articles/the-power-of-studying-combustion-on-the-iss. 
 
Video(s) describing the ACME project can be found at  
https://www1.grc.nasa.gov/space/iss-research/iss-fcf/cir/acme/. 
 
Videos related to s-Flame and other microgravity combustion research can also be 
seen on Facebook at www.facebook.com/space.flames. 
  
Contact Dennis Stocker (dennis.p.stocker@nasa.gov) for access to those videos or for 
additional videos. 
 
 

=== PAGE 15 ===
ACME/s-Flame – 30-Day Operation Accomplishments Report for ISS Increment 63 
 
15 
 
IV. Additional Comments from science team 
Product references are included for clarification and do not indicate an endorsement by NASA or 
the federal government. 
