
=== PAGE 1 ===
Dust and Aerosol Measurement 
Feasibility Test (DAFT)
Principal Investigators : Dr. David Urban, NASA Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, OH; (216) 433-2835; david.l.urban@nasa.gov
Dr. Gary Ruff, NASA Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, OH; (216) 433-5697; gary.a.ruff@nasa.gov
Project Manager: William Sheredy, NASA Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, OH; (216) 433-3685; william.a.sheredy@nasa.gov
Project Lead: Greg Funk, Zin Technologies, Cleveland, OH; (216) 956-2337; gregory.p.funk@zin-tech.com
Operations Lead: Nathan Funk, Zin Technologies, Cleveland, OH; (216) 925-1108; nathan.funk@zin-tech.com
National Aeronautics and
Space Administration
Glenn Research Center
Cleveland, Ohio
DAFT Isn’t As Crazy As It Sounds
 
T
he Dust and Aerosol Measurement Feasibility Test (DAFT) was 
designed to ensure that a modiﬁed P-Trak®—a key component 
of the forthcoming NASA Smoke Aerosol Measurement Experiment 
(SAME)—will perform properly in the unique enviroment of micro-
gravity. If the P-Trak® performs as expected, the device will be used 
in SAME to provide data that will help scientists design better ﬁre 
detectors for future, long-duration, manned missions.
The Challenge  The P-Trak® is a commercial device that counts ultra-
ﬁne particles (it can recognize particles as small as 0.02 micrometer in 
diameter). It works by passing particulate-laden air through a heated 
chamber of vaporous isopropyl alcohol. The individual particles serve 
as “seeds” around which the alcohol condenses when cooled, forming 
droplets large enough to be detected and counted as they scatter light 
from a laser beam (see the schematic on the other side).
The P-Trak® must be tested in microgravity prior to its use in SAME 
because its alcohol condenser was redesigned to work properly in mi-
crogravity. (The original smooth-walled P-Trak® condenser—meant 
for Earth-based use—depends on gravity.) NASA scientists modiﬁed 
the unit’s condenser by forming microgrooves in its wall to increase 
the alcohol ﬂow back to the wick (see photo on right). This modiﬁca-
tion was based on the knowledge gained from previous microgravity 
ﬂuids physics experiments conducted by NASA GRC researchers.
The Plan  The main components of the DAFT experiment—the 
P-Trak® and the DustTrak® aerosol monitoring devices—were 
delivered to the International Space Station (ISS) in February 2005. 
(The DustTrak® uses a sensor to determine the intensity of light being 
scattered by particles and translates that number into an aerosal mass 
measurement. It is being used to test the accuracy of the P-Trak® 
because it is insensitive to gravitational forces.) The ﬁrst set of tests 
were conducted in February and March 2005 and the results were 
encouraging. Importantly, the modiﬁed condenser performed as 
expected. The second set of tests will be conducted after the balance of 
DAFT parts (including a calibrated aerosol source and an unmodiﬁed 
P-Trak®) are delivered to the ISS. 
The P-Trak® and its components (clockwise 
from the left: alcohol wick, wick container, 
container cap, P-Trak®, and battery pack.)
A cross-section of the modiﬁed P-Trak® 
condenser chamber shows the microgrooves 
that NASA engineers cut on the inside 
diameter to improve the ﬂow of alcohol back 
to the wick in microgravity.
An engineer holding the DustTrak® (top) and 
the P-Trak® in their approximate locations 
in the EXPRESS rack (the blue velcro board 
has been superceded by straps).

=== PAGE 2 ===
Research Procedure  During the ISS tests conducted in 2005, 
astronauts performed several steps:
Turned on the P-Trak® and the DustTrak®
Attached High Efﬁciency Particulate Air (HEPA) ﬁlters to the inlets 
to “zero” the particle counters (since the HEPA ﬁlter removes all 
airborne particles, if the particle counters don’t read “0” something 
is amiss)
Connected the devices to a common sampling hose
Recorded the ISS environment for several minutes
Reconnected the HEPA ﬁlters to “zero” the particle counters
Turned off the P-Trak® and the DustTrak®
The tests were conducted in the US laboratory module Destiny in front 
of EXPRESS Rack 4; in the modules’s aft end and port side; and in 
Node 1. (The EXPRESS Rack is a standardized payload rack system that 
transports, stores, and supports experiments aboard the ISS; Node 1 is a 
hub to which various modules are attached.) Three of the tests sampled 
undisturbed cabin air; the other test validated the instruments at high 
particulate levels by having an astronaut create airborne debris at the P-
Trak® and DustTrak® inlets by separating pieces of Velcro®.
Results So Far The three tests that sampled the undisturbed 
environment in the ISS showed very low levels of airborne 
particulates, averaging fewer than 0.005 mg/m3 from the DustTrak® 
and fewer than 15 particles/cm3 from the P-Trak® (these are typical 
readings at the baseline). These numbers are dramatically lower than 
the values recorded in the Space Shuttle in an earlier experiment (~ 
.050 mg/m3).  Lower levels are to be expected because the ISS US 
Lab has HEPA ﬁltration for the cabin air as compared to merely a ﬁne 
screen on the shuttle air handler.  Furthermore, the typical shuttle crew 
of seven astronauts generates more airborne particulate than an ISS 
crew of two astronauts. 
Future DAFT Tests  The next series of tests will take place once 
the remaining DAFT equipment is delivered to the ISS. These will be 
performed with Arizona Road Dust (ARD)—a standard aerosal test 
material of known particle size and distribution—and nitrogen aerosol 
inside a 15-liter Mylar® bag.  Testing a known particulate will allow 
scientists to establish deﬁnitively how well the P-Trak® works in 
microgravity.
Additional Information  More experiment details—including 
periodic updates and photos—can be found on the DAFT Web site: 
http://microgravity.grc.nasa.gov/combustion/daft/daft_index.htm.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
DAFT: Research Procedure—Results So Far—Future DAFT Tests—Additional Information
The DustTrak®—shown here with its battery 
pack—is insensitive to gravitational forces. 
It is used to determine the accuracy of the 
modiﬁed P-Trak®.
P-Trak®
DustTrak®
Size
(inches)
10.75 x 5.5 x 5.5
8.7 x 5.9 x 3.4
Weight
(lbs)
3.8 
3.3
Particle 
size range 
(mm) 
0.02 to > 1.0
0.10 to 10
The P-Trak® and the DustTrak® compared.
As shown in this P-Trak® schematic, particle-
laden air passes through a heated chamber 
containing vaporized alcohol and then into a 
cooled chamber where the alcohol droplets 
form around the particles. The particles are 
counted as they pass through a laser beam.
Qvnq
Gjmufs
Dpoefotfs
)dppmfs*
Tbuvsbups
)ifbufs*
Xjdl!Tpblfe
xjui!Bmdpipm
Gpdvtjoh
Pqujdt
Sfdfjwjoh
Pqujdt
Mbtfs
Mjhiu
Tpvsdf
Efufdups
Jomfu
)bjs!mbefo
xjui!qbsujdmft*
