
=== PAGE 1 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
1 
 
Advanced Combustion via Microgravity Experiments (ACME) 
Structure and Response of Spherical Diffusion Flames (s-Flame) 
 
 
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021*) 
 
 
Prepared by: 
Dennis P. Stocker, NASA Glenn Research Center 
dennis.p.stocker@nasa.gov, 216-433-2166 
Prof. Chung K. Law, Princeton University 
Prof. Stephen D. Tse, Rutgers University 
 
 
 
A preliminary false-colored image of a hydrogen/helium flame in an oxygen/helium atmosphere, 
where the porous spherical burner and its supply tube can be seen within the flame.  The bright 
glow of two 14-micron fibers used for Thin Filament Pyrometry (TFP) is also visible. 
 
 
*Data analysis and the publication of results is still underway, so it is expected that this 
report will be updated in the future with at least a revision of the list of papers and 
presentations. 

=== PAGE 2 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
2 
 
Table of Contents 
        Page 
1. Overview 
3  
2. Science Overview 
 3 
A. Background 
3 
B. Rationale for Microgravity 
4  
C. Science Objectives  
5   
D. Science Success Criteria 
7 
3. Hardware Overview 
9 
A. General Description 
9 
B. Hardware Shortcomings 
17 
4. Preliminary Results 
19 
A. Changed Test Plans 
19 
B. Overview of Experiment Test Operations 
20 
C. Summary of Preliminary Results 
25 
D. Surprises and New Discoveries 
29 
E. Accomplishment of Approved Objectives 
30 
F. Additional Objectives Achieved 
31 
G. Impacts, Benefits, and Products 
32 
H. Patents 
32 
5. Follow-On Experiments 
33 
6. Appendices 
34 
A. Abbreviations and Acronyms 
34 
B. 30-Day Operational Accomplishments Report for ISS Increments 59 and 60 
37 
C. 30-Day Operational Accomplishments Report for ISS Increments 61 and 62 
46 
D. 30-Day Operational Accomplishments Report for ISS Increment 63 
57 
E. Operational Timeline 
72 
F. Astronauts and Cosmonauts who Conducted ISS Operations for s-Flame 
74 
G. ISS Operations per the Payload Weekly Science Summary 
75 
H. Crew Activity per Space Station Science Highlights 
88 
I. 
Crew Activity per the ISS Daily Summary Report 
92 
J. Crew Activity per the NASA Space Station Blog 
97 
K. ACME Operations per @ISS_Research on Twitter 
100 
L. ACME Operations per Astronauts on Twitter 
104 
M. Summary of the ISS data collection 
106 
N. Publications, Presentations, Awards, and Outreach 
107 
1. Publications and Presentations with ISS Results 
107 
2. Publications and Presentations (comprehensive list) 
107 
3. Awards 
113 
4. Outreach 
113 
 
 
 
 
 
 

=== PAGE 3 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
3 
 
1. Overview 
The Structure and Response of Spherical Diffusion Flames (s-Flame) experiment is one of six independent 
experiments that make up the Advanced Combustion via Microgravity Experiments (ACME) project for 
which tests are conducted within the Combustion Integrated Rack (CIR) on the International Space Station 
(ISS). 
 
The experiment’s Principal Investigator (PI) is Prof. Chung K. Law of Princeton University.  The experiment 
has two Co-Investigators (Co-Is), namely Prof. Stephen D. Tse of Rutgers University and Dr. Kurt R. 
Sacksteder of the NASA Glenn Research Center.  While Sacksteder was actively engaged in defining the 
experiment, he had transitioned to other NASA work long before the spaceflight operations limiting his 
overall contributions.  
 
Meanwhile, Dennis P. Stocker of the NASA Glenn Research Center is the Project Scientist (PS) for ACME 
including s-Flame and the rest of the ACME investigations.  In preparatory drop testing, etc., Dr. Fumiaki 
Takahashi of the Case Western Reserve University (CWRU) served as the Deputy Project Scientist.  For 
ACME’s spaceflight operations, the NASA science team includes Drs. Vedha Nayagam and Uday G. Hegde 
who are also with CWRU. 
 
The s-Flames operations were conducted in two rounds of testing during Increments 60-63, where there 
was no testing during Increment 62 due to limited crew availability.  More specifically, the first round of 
testing was conducted from Sept. 2019 to Jan. 2020, while the second-round testing – featuring helium 
rather than nitrogen dilution - occurred from May to July 2020. 
 
 
2. Science Overview 
A. Background 
This background is the Executive Summary from the experiment’s Science Requirements Document 
(SRD) of Jan. 2010. 
 
Recognizing that most combustion engines and devices operate on the basis of diffusion flames, 
the proposed program aims to characterize and gain predictive capability of the structure and 
dynamics of diffusion flames in simple, well-defined flow fields such that the phenomena of 
interest can be studied without being unduly complicated and compromised by complex and 
sometimes non-quantifiable flow field effects.  The basic flame configuration adopted for the 
investigation is the spherically symmetric diffusion flame generated by discharging a fuel gas from 
a porous spherical burner into a quiescent, oxidizing ambience in microgravity.  The one-
dimensional nature of the system facilitates data acquisition, data reduction, and computational 
simulation. 
 
The primary goals of the program are two-fold and strongly interdependent.  The first objective 
is to interrogate the fidelity of the chemical kinetic mechanisms and transport submodels used in 
the simulation of aerothermochemical phenomena, and consequently identify possible 
modifications.  The second objective is to characterize and gain predictive capability on spherical 
diffusion flames. 
 

=== PAGE 4 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
4 
 
The space flight program consists of two main parts: (1) Mapping and characterization of the 
movement of spherical diffusion flames subsequent to ignition from a non-steady-state condition 
and their extinction boundaries due to direct finite-rate chemistry and indirect radiative heat loss.  
The emphases are on the relative importance of radiative emission and re-absorption, the 
examination of the adequacy of the detailed chemical kinetics mechanism and transport sub-
models used, and the development of flame front instabilities that could modify the extinction 
boundaries.  Results of the study are of relevance to the development of lean-burn engines for 
improved efficiency and reduced pollutant emissions.  (2) Studies of the response of 
characteristically sooty flames to a non-steady-state initial condition with respect to the aspects 
given in (1).  The studies will include characterizing soot onset as a function of residence time for 
expanding flames, as well as soot radiation and transport contributions in spreading, extinction, 
and instability. 
 
The project involves microgravity experimentation, computational simulation, and, where 
appropriate, theoretical analysis.  Interpretation of all phenomena will emphasize the 
simultaneous and coupled influence of chemistry and transport. 
 
B. Rationale for Microgravity 
This is the ‘Justification for Extended Duration Microgravity Environment’ section (2.5) of the 
experiment’s SRD from Jan. 2010.  See the SRD itself for the references, etc. which are not included 
in this report. 
 
2.5.1 Limitations of Terrestrial (1g laboratory) Testing 
We seek to make observations of truly one-dimensional flames whose structure can be studied 
without complications due to uncertainties in the flow pattern caused by buoyancy.  Such 
fundamental study of flame structure and dynamics is best served via the elimination of buoyancy 
through the reduction of gravity. 
 
The minimum sizes of these flames imply that buoyancy would be significant if the experiments 
were conducted in normal gravity.  Previous experimentation on earth has amply demonstrated 
this influence.  Although studies of spherical diffusion flames were conducted in normal gravity 
using the low-pressure, inverse-flame arrangement (see §1), the conditions are limited for small 
flames, low pressures, low molecular weight fuels. Indeed, only the hydrogen flame can be 
considered to be nearly buoyancy free.  With such constraints, normal-pressure, micro-gravity, 
hydrocarbon-based experiments are requisite. 
 
One-dimensional spherical flames allow for the unambiguous study of such fundamental flame 
phenomena as the dynamics and extinction of diffusion flames (including the mechanisms of 
flame front unsteadiness), soot suppression/formation, and flame front instabilities, without 
gravity-induced baroclinicity and buoyancy, on the flame responses. 
 
 

=== PAGE 5 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
5 
 
2.5.2 Limitations of Drop Towers and Aircraft 
Extensive experimentation has been conducted in the 2.2-s drop tower, 5-s drop tower, and 
parabolic aircraft, as reviewed previously in §1.3.  Although experimental data of good quality 
were obtained on the transient response of spherical diffusion flames in the 2.2-s drop tower 
facility, the duration was insufficient to observe radiative extinction.  The numerical simulations 
indicate that, for the characteristic flames under study, more than 2.5s of microgravity time is 
needed. Subsequent parabolic aircraft experimentation afforded the additional low-gravity 
duration (up to 10s by free-floating the apparatus), as well as an experimental package 
incorporating rainbow schlieren (which cannot be contained within a package for the 2.2-s drop 
tower), although radiative extinction was still not observed.  The unavoidable g-jitter associated 
with the facility, however, renders the observation less definitive.  Note that even though the 
package was free-floated, umbilical restrictions could not be avoided.  This g-jitter effect was 
substantiated by accelerometer data. 5-s drop tower experiments for a mixture composition of 
20%H2 / 25%CH4 / 55%N2 did show events with local extinction toward the end of the drop (see 
Fig. 1.11).  While these new results are extremely encouraging and suggest that radiative 
extinction can indeed be experimentally observed, the 5-s duration is still insufficient.  To obtain 
spherical symmetry for small burners (in order to minimize heat loss to the burner), as well as to 
ensure quasi-steady flame evolution up to radiative extinction (for the flame sizes to be studied), 
low mass flow rates are needed, which increase the characteristic time needed.  Moreover, for 
other mixture compositions (such as 50%H2/10%CH4/40%N2 45%H2/55%N2), more than 5s of 
microgravity duration has been computationally predicted to be needed to achieve radiative 
extinction (see Fig. 1.12). Additional time is also needed to employ multi-staged flames (where 
the mass flow rate is changed) so that such phenomena as kinetic extinction can be studied (for 
example, by establishing a quasi-steady flame at a given flow rate and then reducing it so that the 
flame front moves inwardly and quasi-steadily until kinetic extinction). Finally, given the 
characteristic time for diffusion flame oscillation (see Fig. 1.14), which does not occur until the 
flame nears the quasi-steady extinction limits, extended microgravity duration becomes essential 
in order to study the phenomenon. 
 
2.5.3 Justification for Space-Flight Facility 
As explained above, extended microgravity duration, of high quality, is needed to make all 
necessary flame structure measurements, allowing for the study of transient phenomena (such 
as flame oscillations and fuel vapor accumulation) and extinction processes.  Moreover, at 
present, the advanced diagnostics found on the space-flight facility cannot be utilized in the drop 
tower facilities.  Numerical simulations indicate that about 25s of microgravity is needed for non-
extinguishing flames to reach 80% of their steady-state radius, for the fuel mixtures and flow rates 
examined.  It is expected that within this duration, the aforementioned phenomenon can be duly 
investigated.  The total experimental duration for a single case would be 25s.  This duration is 
within the 25s bound imposed by constant volume combustion within the specified CIR 
dimensions (see §Appendix 5.1) regarding oxygen depletion for a “penetration depth” of 20cm. 
 
C. Science Objectives 
The proposed objectives text presented here is the ‘Experimental Objectives’ section (2.1) of the 
experiment’s SRD from Jan. 2010.  
 
Current experimental and theoretical capabilities make detailed, quantitative descriptions of 
laminar flames situated in well-defined flow fields conceivable provided that comprehensive 

=== PAGE 6 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
6 
 
chemical-kinetic and transport mechanisms are available.  The comprehensiveness of these 
mechanisms has been extensively tested for premixed but not diffusion flames, especially in 
simple, well-defined flow fields not complicated by buoyant flows.  A burner-generated spherical 
diffusion flame provides a simple, one-dimensional flame geometry that permits a rigorous 
comparison between detailed theory and experimental verification.  Existing theory and limited 
low-gravity experimental results suggest that quasi-steady spherical diffusion flames can exist 
with some combinations of fuel mixture supply rates and quiescent ambient oxidizers.  With 
respect to the steady flame conditions, altering fuel supply rates to limit flame residence time 
induces a convective-kinetic extinction limit.  Alternatively, very large residence times allow 
radiative heat losses and diffusive transport mechanisms to quench the flame.  Near these dual 
flammability boundaries of quasi-steady flames, flame-front instabilities may appear before the 
flame is quenched. 
 
We seek to investigate and improve the fidelity and comprehensiveness of the chemical kinetic 
mechanisms and transport submodels used in the simulation of aerothermochemical 
phenomena, and consequently identify possible modifications, by characterizing important unit 
combustion processes, including: (1) the dynamics and extinction of diffusion flames, with 
emphases on fuel vapor accumulation, radiation heat transfer, flame pulsation, and flame 
kinetics; and (2) the structure and response of characteristically sooty flames, with emphases on 
flame front stability and soot formation.  Comprehensive predictive capability can be achieved by 
employing the simple flames of Process (1) to interrogate and suggest modifications of the kinetic 
and transport data bases, and then validate their adequacy in the chemically and aerodynamically 
more complex situation of Process (2). 
 
A series of experiments is proposed with the following specific objectives, in both soot-free and 
sooty flames, to compare with detailed computational simulation to assess transport properties 
and detailed chemical kinetics (including chemiluminescence): 
 
Objective A. Measure and characterize the transient structure (such as temperature and species 
distribution) of diffusion flames established at initially non-steady, spherical flame structures for 
mixtures of different H2/CH4/diluent ratios (soot-free) and different C2H4/diluent ratios (sooty), 
for different flow rates. 
 
Objective B. Determine the quasi-steady convective/chemical-kinetic extinction limits (low 
system Damköhler numbers) and radiative/chemical-kinetic extinction limits (high system 
Damköhler numbers) for mixtures of different H2/CH4/diluent ratios (soot-free) and different 
C2H4/diluent ratios (sooty). 
 
Objective C. Determine the existence (for different Zeldovich number, Ze), onset (as a function 
Da), and nature (i.e. mode, frequency, amplitude) of pulsating instabilities theoretically predicted 
to occur in transient spherical diffusion flames using fuel/diluent mixtures that are above a critical 
Lewis number. 
 
 
 
 

=== PAGE 7 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
7 
 
D. Science Success Criteria 
The success criteria is from the s-Flame’ portion of the ‘Success Criteria’ section of the ACME 
Integrated Science Requirements Document (ISRD, ACME-SRD-001.B) from Sept. 2013, which is 
revision B of the version prepared for the Requirements Definition Review (RDR). 
 
6.4.1. Minimum Success 
Minimum success is defined to mean sufficient scientific data return from the experiment to 
perform a direct comparison with the numerical flame simulation and publish a single archival 
journal article.  This minimal level of success may be achieved by obtaining (for example): 
1. Observations of transient flame phenomena leading toward steady state flames for 1 CH4 case 
and 1 C2H4 case. Such observations must include, at a minimum, the flow and boundary condition 
measurements, flame temperature data and image sequences from at least two orthogonal 
imaging systems; or 
2. Observations of flame extinction at both low and high system Damköhler number for 1 case. 
Such observations must include, at a minimum, the flow and boundary condition measurements, 
flame temperature data and image sequences from at least two orthogonal imaging systems; or 
3. Observations of spherical soot formation in 1 C2H4 case. Such observations must include, at a 
minimum, the flow and boundary condition measurements, flame temperature data and image 
sequences from at least two orthogonal imaging systems. 
 
6.4.2. High Success 
High success is defined to mean sufficient scientific data return from the experiment to perform 
direct comparison with the numerical flame simulation resulting in multiple archival journal 
publications, but less return that defined for complete success. This high level of success may be 
achieved by obtaining (for example): 
1. Observations of at least two instances of flame front instabilities including at least one 
hydrocarbon fuel. Such observations must include, at a minimum, the flow and boundary 
condition measurements, and data quantifying the flame front oscillations from image sequences 
from at least two of the three imaging systems and from the radiometer instrument; or 
2. Combinations or extensions (in terms of number of mixture ratios for a single hydrocarbon fuel 
or number of hydrocarbon fuels) of at least two of items 1 through 4 defined for minimum success. 
 
6.4.3. Complete Success 
Complete Success is defined as meeting all of the experiment objectives, 
including as a minimum: 
1. Observations of transient flame phenomena leading toward steady state flames for at least 
three different mixture ratios of each of two hydrocarbon fuels and two diluents.  Such 
observations must include, at a minimum, the flow and boundary condition measurements, flame 
temperature data, image sequences from two orthogonal imaging systems, and radiometer data; 
and 
2. Observations of flame extinction at both low and high system Damköhler number for at least 
three different mixture ratios of each of two hydrocarbon fuels and two diluents.  Such 
observations must include, at a minimum, the flow and boundary condition measurements, flame 
temperature data, image sequences from two orthogonal imaging systems, and radiometer data; 
and 
3. Observations of at least two instances of flame front instabilities each including at least one 
hydrocarbon fuel. Such observations must include, at a minimum, the flow and boundary 

=== PAGE 8 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
8 
 
condition measurements, and data quantifying the flame front oscillations from image sequences 
from at least two orthogonal imaging systems and from the radiometer instrument; and  
4. Observations of soot formation. Such observations must include the flow and boundary 
condition measurements, flame temperature data, image sequences from all imaging systems, 
temperature data, and radiometer data. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

=== PAGE 9 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
9 
 
3. Hardware Overview 
A. General Description 
This section is copied from section 2.A of the April 2021 version of ‘ACME Engineering 
Implementation’ which should be consulted for additional details. 
 
This section provides a general description a general description of the ACME engineering from 
the ‘3.0 Experimental’ section of the following 2014 conference paper: 
Dennis P. Stocker, Fumiaki Takahashi, J. Mark Hickman, and Andrew C. Suttles, “Gaseous 
Non-Premixed Flame Research Planned for the International Space Station,” Spring 
Technical Meeting of the Central States Section of the Combustion Institute, Tulsa, OK, 16–
18 March 2014. 
 
IMPORTANT: The 2104 paper from which this section was extracted proceeded completion of the 
spaceflight hardware which was mostly launched in 2017.  As a result, it does not accurately 
describe the final engineering in some regards.   Therefore updates, clarifications, additional 
details, shortcomings, references, etc. have been included in boxed notes like this following the 
original description.  As a minor note, the sizes of figures were adjusted in this report, but none 
were cropped. 
 
As previously discussed, the ACME experiments will be conducted within the Combustion 
Integrated Rack (CIR) using a chamber insert, depicted in Figure 2, which was designed to 
accommodate gas delivery to a variety of exchangeable burners.  Besides the chamber insert, 
other ACME-unique hardware includes a high-definition color camera and an avionics package, 
which is for data acquisition and control. 
 
 
Figure 2: Design of the Advanced Combustion via Microgravity Experiments (ACME) chamber 
insert that will be used in the Combustion Integrated Rack (CIR) on ISS. 

=== PAGE 10 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
10 
 
ACME’s chamber insert, which is ~0.4 m in diameter, provides common mounting for a variety of 
burners on the chamber axis (but only one at a time) and includes a retracting resistive igniter.  As 
depicted in Figure 3, there will initially be gas-jet burners (with inner diameters ranging from 0.4 
to 3.2 mm), a small coflow burner (where the two concentric tubes have inner diameters of 2.1 
and 25 mm), porous spherical burners (with diameters ranging from 6.35 to 12.7 mm), and two 
flat porous burners for the BRE experiment (with inner diameters of 25 and 50 mm).  Most burners 
will be equipped with a surface thermocouple, and each BRE burner will have two heat flux 
transducers.  The internal pressure of the porous burners will be measured to allow monitoring 
of the pressure differential across the outlet surface.  The igniter will have a crew-exchangeable 
tip and arm (to accommodate the various burners) and its stepper-motor drive will allow for 
precise positioning. 
 
 
Figure 3: ACME burner types, including from left to right, gas-jet burners, a co-flow burner, 
porous spherical burners, and flat porous burners for the BRE experiment. 
 
Ultimately, the spherical burners were limited to a single diameter of 6.35 mm, and the fabricated 
gas-jet burners were limited to two sizes with nominal inner diameters of 1.3 and 2.1 mm.  
However, only the larger gas-jet burner was used during the spaceflight tests.  The burners are 
addressed in detail in section 3.C. 
 
Unfortunately, the spherical burners have not always yielded spherically symmetric flames, 
presumably as a result of (1) greater burner flow through the joint between the porous sphere and 
supply tube, and (2) heat loss to the support tube (encompassing the supply tube) causing local 
flame quenching. 
 
Two types of igniter tips have been used during ACME testing.  Most tests have been conducted 
using a loop igniter tip like those which had been successfully used in the droplet combustion 
experiments which preceded ACME research in the CIR.  However, some tests were conducted with 
a coil igniter tip, where that included the second round testing for both the Burning Rate Emulator 
(BRE) and Structure and Response of Spherical Diffusion Flames (s-Flame) experiments, with the 
exception of the latter’s first day testing.  The CFI-G investigation will also use the coil igniter tip.  
For more information about the igniter tips, see section 3.D. 
 
The chamber insert includes three mass flow controllers (visible on the left of Fig. 2) for the 
delivery of fuel, oxidizer or inert (e.g., helium or carbon dioxide), and nitrogen to the burner.  The 
maximum fuel flow is 2 slpm (on a nitrogen basis), whereas much higher flows, e.g., 10 slpm (on 
a nitrogen basis), are possible for the oxidizer and nitrogen lines.  The crew can exchange the mass 
flow controllers to provide appropriate ranges that maximize the flow accuracy.  The gas delivery 
system enables on-orbit dilution of the fuel or oxidizer (but not both simultaneously), coflow, 
inverse flames (e.g., oxidizer delivery to the center of a coflow burner), and premixed flames, 

=== PAGE 11 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
11 
 
although the latter are not planned for any of the current ACME experiments.  Gases can also be 
delivered premixed to the space station where that is necessary in some circumstances, such as 
the blending of different fuel gases.  CIR’s standard bottle sizes are 1, 2.25, and 3.8 liters but ACME 
will sometimes use smaller bottles as a hazard control to limit the deficient reactant (e.g., fuel) 
that can be released into the combustion chamber. 
 
Thus far, ACME tests were not conducted with carbon dioxide as a diluent.  Furthermore, the fuel 
diluted with helium was premixed prior to launch rather than on orbit.  Ultimately, oxidizer flows 
of up to 20 slpm (on a nitrogen basis) were possible, while the nitrogen flow was limited to a 
maximum of 5 slpm.  ACME has not used gas bottles smaller than 1 liter as indicated above; the 
bottle fill pressure was instead limited as an additional hazard control.  
 
ACME’s primary flame diagnostics are a suite of imaging systems including five video cameras and 
two illumination systems, of which three cameras are part of the CIR facility and are already in 
use on orbit.  All but one of the cameras is mounted outside of the chamber.  Collectively, the 
imaging systems will enable color, CH*, and OH* imaging; pyrometry; measurement of the soot 
volume fraction; and operational support.  However, it is unlikely that all functions would be 
exercised at any one time as will become apparent in the subsequent discussion. 
 
Color imaging is provided by two cameras: a high-definition digital camera mounted outside of 
the chamber and a standard analog camera mounted on the chamber insert (with a turning 
mirror).  Both cameras are part of the ACME hardware that is now in development.  The analog 
camera signal will be downlinked in near real time to support the experiment operations.  Light-
emitting diodes within the chamber can be used to illuminate the igniter and burner to both 
support the operations and provide reference images.  The 12-bit digital camera records at up to 
30 full frames (1360x1024) per second, and is equipped with a motorized lens with independent 
control of the zoom, iris, and focus.  The digital camera will be equipped with a filter assembly 
with four options, where selection of a clear “filter” allows for color imaging.  Color imaging can 
also be carried out with a blue-green BG7 Schott glass filter, which balances the color planes to 
avoid saturation in the red while maintaining sensitivity in the blue and green.  The natural flame 
color can be approximately reconstructed, but the primary purpose of the filter is pyrometry and 
measurement of the soot volume fraction, again via the techniques of [23-24].  Alternately, CH* 
imaging can be conducted with this camera because the filter assembly includes a 430-nm 
bandpass filter with a 10-nm full width at half-maximum transmission (FWHM).  A 450-nm 
bandpass filter (again with a 10-nm FWHM) can be used with the CH* filter to effectively subtract 
interfering broadband soot emission.  However, the filter assembly rotates slowly so such 
subtraction effectively requires a separate test with each filter and of course reproducible flame 
conditions. 
 
The video from the analog operations (i.e., ops) camera, also referred to as the internal camera, 
is not archived in space.  The video is instead recorded on the ground in the operations center.  Its 
gain was sometimes adjusted for improved imaging of dim flames, e.g., approaching extinction.   
 
The sensitivity of the color digital camera, often referenced as the ACME DataCam (i.e., Data 
Camera), to the dim microgravity flames was such that it was often used with long exposure times 
and thus low framing rates, for example on the order of 1 frame per second.  The clear “filter” is 
of fused silica.  Unfortunately, the thickness of the blue-green BG7 Schott glass filter and the added 

=== PAGE 12 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
12 
 
antireflective (AR) coating caused too great a reduction in the red, so it does not balance the 
intensity of the three color planes as intended and thereby can limit the accuracy of temperature 
determination.  Meanwhile, rather than the 450-nm bandpass filter described above, the high 
definition color camera was equipped with a bandpass filter for imaging formaldehyde emissions.   
For more information, see the Data Camera Characterization Report (ACME-RPT-010 Rev. A).   
 
Imaging of the dim hydrogen flames in the Structure and Response of Spherical Diffusion Flames 
(s-Flame) experiment was particularly challenging with these, if not all, cameras.   
 
Pyrometry can alternately be accomplished with CIR’s monochrome High-Bit Depth Multispectral 
(HiBMs) camera, equipped with a Liquid-Crystal Tunable Filter (LCTF), which allows for imaging at 
multiple spectra, but requires a quasi-steady flame for measurement at each desired band.  This 
camera has a telecentric optical system and is recorded at 512x512 and 30 frames per second 
(fps).  Although it has a 1024x1024 pixel array, binning has been necessary because of signal loss 
through the LCTF.  Both soot pyrometry and Thin Filament Pyrometry (TFP) are possible, where 
ACME is equipped with a crew-replaceable array of 5 silicon carbide (SiC) fibers.  The fibers are 
orthogonal to the flame axis and the array can be translated along the flame axis to the desired 
position downstream of the burner, e.g., based on the downlink of the analog video.  During set 
up, the crew can manually orient the array so that it is orthogonal to either ACME’s color digital 
camera or the HiBMs camera with the LCTF.  An alternate fiber array including a platinum wire 
will be used for inflight characterization, which in combination with preflight calibration will 
enable determination of the soot volume fraction [24]. 
 
In contrast to the preceding paragraph, ACME did not use a HiBMs camera for pyrometry, but 
instead relied on use of ACME’s color DataCam for such temperature measurements.  For an 
example of how this can be done, see the techniques described in the following papers:   
P.B. Kuhn, B. Ma, B.C. Connelly, M.D. Smooke, and M.B. Long, “Soot and Thin-filament Pyrometry 
Using a Color Digital Camera,” Proceedings of the Combustion Institute, 33 (2011) 743-750.  
B. Ma, M. B. Long, “Absolute light calibration using S-type thermocouples,” Proceedings of the 
Combustion Institute, 34 (2) (2013) 3531-3539. 
 
Thus far, TFP tests have been conducted with 14-micron fibers spaced apart by 5 mm for a total 
span of 20 mm (in the case of 5 intact ceramic fibers), neglecting optional translation of the array.  
Tests have been conducted using arrays with and without the platinum wire in the furthest 
downstream position.  Tests have also been conducted with some of the fibers broken and 
subsequently removed, leaving only three fibers in the final testing for the BRE and Coflow Laminar 
Diffusion Flame (CLD Flame) experiments and at least the initial testing for the Cool Flames 
Investigation with Gases (CFI-G). 
 
CIR has a second HiBMs camera, without a filter, that will be used in combination with CIR’s 
illumination package for alternate measurements of the soot volume fraction.  This will be 
accomplished via an extinction technique previously employed in microgravity [3,6,26], where the 
camera and the collimated light source (with its two fiber-coupled laser diodes) are positioned at 
opposite windows.  The images are recorded at 1024x1024 and 30 fps.  Thus far, the primary 
purpose of this combined system has been the measurement of the droplet diameter for 
determination of the droplet burning rate. 
 

=== PAGE 13 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
13 
 
A HiBMs camera without the Liquid Crystal Tunable Filter (LCTF) has been used throughout much, 
but not all, of ACME’s operations.  In the first round of the CLD Flame experiment, it was used 
without a filter for flame imaging, but this proved to be largely unsuccessful because the camera 
is very insensitive to blue.  Afterward, it was equipped with a red filter corresponding to the CIR 
illumination package for the rest of the ACME testing.  Unfortunately, that filter is sufficiently 
broad that significant incandescence can pass through the filter limiting its utility for 
determinations of soot volume fraction via light extinction, e.g., through the technique described 
in the following papers: 
D.L. Urban, Z.G. Yuan, P.B. Sunderland, K.C., Lin, Z. Dai, and G.M. Faeth, “Smoke-Point Properties 
of Nonbuoyant Round Laminar Jet Diffusion Flames,” Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth 
Symposium (International) on Combustion 28 (2000) 1965-1972.  
F.J. Diez, C. Aalburg, P.B. Sunderland, D.L. Urban, Z.-G. Yuan, G.M. Faeth, “Soot properties of 
laminar jet diffusion flames in microgravity,” Combustion and Flame, 156 (2009) 1514-1524.  
P.S. Greenberg and J.C. Ku, “Soot Volume Fraction Imaging,” Applied Optics, 36 (22) (1997) 5514-
5522. 
Nonetheless, soot volume fraction can also be determined from the color DataCam images. 
 
During ACME operations, the HiBMs camera is typically archived at 15 fps because of data limits 
for transfer and downlink operations.  And because operations are constrained by the data limits, 
image data from this camera are sometimes deleted without downlinking to enable additional 
testing.  And in some testing, HiBMs images aren’t even acquired given their lesser value. 
 
Unfortunately, the HiBMs backlight illumination is significantly obstructed by the bracket for the 
electrode mesh further limiting its utility for the E-FIELD Flames experiment.   This was a design 
trade-off necessitated primarily by ACME’s large number of cameras and other optical 
instruments. 
 
CIR’s Low-Light-Level Ultraviolet (LLL-UV) package is a monochrome camera with an intensifier 
(for 280-700 nm) and a 310-nm bandpass filter (with a 10-nm FWHM) for OH* imaging.  Again as 
a result of the signal loss through the filter, binning is employed such that the OH* images are 
recorded at 512x512 and 30 fps. 
 
During ACME operations, the LLL-UV camera has only been used for the Structure and Response 
of Spherical Diffusion Flames (s-Flame) experiment. 
 
While not discussed in the preceding section, another intensified camera was used throughout 
ACME testing, although its image data was sometimes deleted or not even acquired to allow the 
performance of additional tests.   This was the Cool Flames Investigation (CFI) camera which was 
generally configured with its CH* filter, where an exception is some s-Flame testing with 
particularly dim flames.  Due to design trade-offs, its Field of View (FOV) was partially obstructed 
by the arms of the Thin Filament Pyrometry (TFP) fiber array when it was moved inwards to the 
flame.  More information about this camera can be found in its characterization report, CIR-RPT-
4600. 
 
The ACME chamber insert will also be equipped with non-imaging optical diagnostics including 
both thermopile radiometers and Photomultiplier Tubes (PMTs).  There is a crew-exchangeable 
linear array of radiometers of which there are two versions supporting the initial set of 

=== PAGE 14 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
14 
 
experiments.  The array has a fixed position which is parallel to the chamber axis and centered 
(along the chamber length) relative to the chamber windows and thus most of the other 
instrumentation.  One array is equipped with a single wide-view radiometer with two narrow-
view radiometers that are downstream and two more that are upstream, where all views are 
orthogonal to the chamber axis, as depicted in Figure 4.  The narrow-view radiometers are 
intended to support studies of gas-jet flames, where ACME can accommodate shorter burners, 
making the “lower” detectors useful.  The other array, also seen in Fig. 4, provides for three wide-
view measurements of the flame, where one view is masked to nominally block radiant emission 
from the burner.  It was specifically designed for the BRE experiment but will be a resource 
available to other ACME experiments.  Given that the radiometer array can be exchanged by the 
crew, alternate arrays could be developed.   
 
 
Figure 4: Crew-exchangeable radiometer arrays on the ACME chamber insert: (top) standard 
(ACME) array of 5 radiometers, and (bottom) array with three radiometers, designed for the BRE 
experiment, where the lowest detector is masked to avoid view of the burner. 

=== PAGE 15 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
15 
 
A third radiometer array was developed for the CFI-G experiment, where it is important to 
understand that only a single radiometer array can be used at a time. 
 
The narrow-view radiometers in the standard array are only fully sensitive in small spots, but they 
are each sensitive in a much greater Field of View (FOV) than represented in the preceding figure.   
They do not have lenses; their FOV is a result of an aperture where most of their FOV is within the 
penumbra which is only visible to a portion of the sensor.  Figures representing the measured FOVs 
of the as-built standard and BRE radiometer arrays are found in section 3.F of this document.   
 
Unfortunately, the radiometers in the BRE array typically saturated in the first round of BRE 
testing, so the standard array was used in its second round.  However, those radiometers similarly 
saturated in many of round 2 tests.  In this regard, each of ACME’s BRE and standard radiometers 
have a fixed gain.  Meanwhile, each sensor in the radiometer array developed for the CFI-G 
investigation has two fixed gains, i.e., a high gain and low gain.   
 
For more information about the standard radiometer array used for most ACME testing, see the 
Radiometer Characterization Report (ACME-RPT-011).  Meanwhile, you can learn about the other 
radiometer arrays from the BRE Radiometer Characterization Report (ACME-RPT-012) and the 
Cool Flames Radiometer Characterization Report (CIR-RPT-4600).    
 
An additional wide-view radiometer, that is fixed and not crew exchangeable, is positioned 
downstream of the burner and flame at 30o from the chamber axis.  This detector is primarily 
intended to support the spherical flame experiments and will have a quicker response than the 
more sensitive detectors that will used in the linear arrays.   Like the radiometers on the two linear 
arrays, it will have a spectral range of nominally 0.2-11 micron and its field of view will be 
established by an appropriately selected aperture. 
 
The FOV of the off-set radiometer is also shown in section 3.F.  Learn more about this sensor from 
the Radiometer Characterization Report (ACME-RPT-011).   
 
To detect the quenching of dim flames, the chamber insert will be equipped with a set of three 
PMTs.  Each PMT will have a wide-angle view, a sight line that is orthogonal to the chamber axis, 
and will be centered (along the chamber length) relative to the chamber windows so that it is 
aligned with most of the other instrumentation.  The PMTs’ spectral range will be 230-700 nm, 
i.e., visible and near ultraviolet, but one will have a 310-nm bandpass filter and another will have 
a 430-nm bandpass filter (where both are with a 10-nm FWHM).  The pair of detectors will enable 
measurement of OH* and CH* emission, respectively.  The third PMT will be equipped with a 
neutral density filter to prevent saturation.  Like many other components, the PMT array can be 
removed from the chamber insert by the crew. 
 
Unlike the radiometers, each PMT had a readily adjustable gain.  However, the PMT signals 
sometimes saturated when the gains were set too high.  See the PMT Characterization Report 
(ACME-RPT-013) to learn more about the three Photomultiplier Tube (PMTs).   
 
The chamber insert is also equipped with six far-field thermocouples to measure the spread of 
the thermal field in the spherical flame experiments.  They are of limited utility for other 
experiments because they are positioned upstream of the burner tip.  Therefore, they will 

=== PAGE 16 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
16 
 
generally not be installed by the crew to reduce the chance of accidental damage.  There will be 
two versions of a four-thermocouple rake to allow a choice of near and far measurements.  Other 
arrays could be designed to support future experiments, but they cannot extend downstream of 
the burner tip without interfering with other (e.g., optical) measurements. 
 
The two lone thermocouples, which are both at nominally 200 mm from the center of the spherical 
burner, have been installed throughout ACME testing.  The tip of one was seen to be slightly bent 
early in testing, as discussed and depicted in section 3.G of this report.   
 
Only the short (or far) version of the radiometer rake has been used thus far, where factors include 
the need for crew time to switch between rakes and the heat loss that could result from 
thermocouples in the long (close) rake.  The short (far) rake’s thermocouple tips should nominally 
be at 45, 60, 100, and 100 mm from the spherical burner center.  For thermocouples at the same 
distance from the burner center, the angle between the rays from the burner center to the two 
thermocouples should be 90 degrees.  The bead size of the thermocouples was not measured, but 
it is undoubtedly at least twice the size of the 0.2 mm diameter wire. 
  
The two thermocouples closest to the burner outlets on each four-thermocouple rake are type B, 
while the others are type K. 
 
Experiment-unique hardware is also mounted on the chamber insert.  For example, to 
accommodate the E-FIELD Flames experiment, the insert is equipped with a high-voltage supply 
and a crew-removable electrode mesh which can be set between +10 and -10 kV.   The circular mesh 
is orthogonal to the chamber axis and is positioned (during set up) at either ~35 or ~50 mm 
downstream of the insulated burner.  The ion current between the burner and electrode mesh will 
be determined via measurement of the voltage drop across a known resistor and application of 
Ohm’s Law. 
 
Additional images of the chamber insert can be seen in subsequent sections of this report.  The 
hardware specific to E-FIELD Flames is discussed further in section 2.B. 
 
Additional supporting measurements will be made, where the chamber pressure is a simple 
example.  The ACME experiments will use the CIR’s gas chromatograph for pre- and post-test 
analysis of the chamber atmosphere, e.g., for oxygen, nitrogen, carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide, 
and fuel gases.  Acceleration measurements will be provided by the Space Acceleration 
Measurement System (SAMS) [27], which is the primary instrument for such measurements on 
ISS and previously served that role for the space shuttle. 
 
The CIR’s Gas Chromatograph Instrumentation Package (GCIP) was not used for the CLD Flame or 
E-FIELD Flames investigations and thus far was only sometimes used during BRE, Flame Design, 
and s-Flame testing.  Its use requires significant time and as such effectively reduces the number 
of tests that can be conducted.  However, estimates of the chamber contents were computed 
assuming that the fuel in a normal flame test (for example) was either fully or not at all oxidized, 
e.g., for unsustained ignition in the latter case. 
 
The CIR facility was equipped with a 3-axis SAMS sensor head and the acceleration measurements, 
along with relevant documentation, are accessible via the home page for the Principal Investigator 

=== PAGE 17 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
17 
 
Microgravity Services (PIMS), https://gipoc.grc.nasa.gov/wp/pims/home/.  To be clear, the 
acceleration measurements are not archived with the ACME experiment data in the Physical 
Sciences Informatics (PSI) website, www.nasa.gov/PSI.  
 
All ACME experiments will be constant volume (i.e., rather than constant pressure) studies, where 
the chamber’s free volume will be about 90 liters.  Burner flows will generally be constrained to 
limit the pressure rise, and tests will typically be 0.5-2 minutes in duration. 
 
The chamber’s free volume is approximately 83 liters depending on the installed hardware. 
 
The ACME experiments will be configured, but not conducted, by the ISS crew.  Instead, the 
experiments will be commanded from the ground, specifically from the Telescience Support 
Center (TSC) at the NASA Glenn Research Center in Cleveland, Ohio.  They can be conducted in a 
nominally automated mode using pre-programmed scripts.  However, it will also be possible to 
effectively operate the experiments in a “manual” mode, where changes can be made in response 
to the analog video downlink and the numerical data available in the telemetry stream.  For 
example, a flow rate could be adjusted to approach a stability or soot limit.  Step and ramp 
changes can be made in the flow rate(s) or electric field potential.  The TFP fiber array can be 
translated uniformly through a soot-free flame to get a continuum measurement of the 
temperature field.  In summary, ACME’s experiment control will allow for broad flexibility.   
 
The TSC is now also referred to as the Glenn ISS Payload Operations Center (GIPOC).  Thus far, the 
ACME tests have always been conducted in a nominally automated mode. 
 
B. Hardware Shortcomings 
Key s-Flame shortcomings include image acquisition, limited imaging sensitivity (especially to the 
hydrogen flames), and the flow asymmetry from the burner (especially at high flow rates).   Other 
shortcomings are discussed in this section and Appendices B to D, but the reader may want to 
refer to the ACME Engineering Implementation document for additional information. 
 
At high flow rates, the porous spherical burner used for s-Flame did not produce spherically 
symmetric flames.  While they were nominally spherical at moderate flow rates, the flame’s 
center became increasing offset from the burner center when testing with higher flow rates.  
More specifically, the flame shifted toward the supply tube indicating that the sintered 
attachment of the porous sphere to the supply tube is more ‘open’ than the pores of the sintered 
sphere.  In other words, the flow from the burner is not spherically symmetric.  At sufficiently high 
flow rates, the flame becomes obviously non-spherical, where it can appear to be ellipsoidal or 
even parabolic in shape.  In the latter case, the flame locally quenches near the supply tube. 
 
When s-Flame’s first fuel bottle was installed on 30 July 2019 (19211), it was at the expected 
pressure, but the fuel pressure was observed to drop with time, indicating a leak.  
Troubleshooting, including testing with other fuel bottles, was carried out and it was concluded 
that the leak was related to the bottle’s quick connection and potentially caused by foreign debris.  
The bottle was returned to Earth unused and tested in the ground copy of the CIR, but a leak was 
not found in that ground testing.  As a result of this anomaly, testing with a planned 
hydrogen/methane/nitrogen blend was not accomplished. 
 

=== PAGE 18 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
18 
 
When a fuel or diluent Mass Flow Controller (MFC) was used at a small fraction of its maximum 
flow rate, the actual flow rate sometimes differed from that desired.  More importantly, small 
flow perturbations were observed in some s-Flame tests, where the flow irregularities were most 
apparent through their effect on Photomultiplier Tube (PMT) measurements, e.g., of OH* and 
CH* chemiluminescence.  For example, a momentary increase in fuel flow, naturally leads to 
increased light from the flame.   Steps were made to mitigate such behavior, e.g., by zero-ing the 
MFCs prior to each test, but they were not completely successful. 
 
Ignition of the flames in the second round, with helium rather than nitrogen dilution, presented 
a challenge.  The properties of the two gases differ dramatically; for example, helium’s thermal 
conductivity is several times greater than that of nitrogen.  A cautious approach was taken in 
increasing the igniter power on the first test day with helium (11 May 2020, i.e., 20132) because 
of concerns about potential failure of the igniter tip and the stalled operations that would result.  
The number of tests accomplished with that day’s conditions were limited as a result. 
 
The standard igniter tip was subsequently replaced with a replaced with a coil, rather than loop, 
design which was believed to be more robust because of the thicker wire.  The coil igniter was 
used successfully in subsequent testing, but still with caution where flames were not always 
ignited successfully.  As a result, some tests with helium dilution were conducted in atmospheres 
with ~30% oxygen (by volume) instead of the planned ~21%, which as one would expect facilitated 
ignition.  As a result, tests were conducted with an inconsistent mix of oxygen concentrations, 
which may yield valuable insights, but limits the planned test-to-test comparisons.  
 
The CIR’s Image Processing and Storage Unit for Gigabit Ethernet cameras (IPSU-G), which is used 
with the ACME Data Camera (DataCam) and Cool Flames Investigation (CFI) intensified camera, 
didn’t properly archive all of the image data on 13 Sept. 2019 (19256), where a large fraction of 
the image data was lost while flames were burning.   After troubleshooting attempts, the IPSU-G 
was removed and replaced by astronaut Jessica Meir on 24 October 24 (19297) where subsequent 
check-out on Oct. 28 (19301) confirmed normal archival of the image data. 
 
The DataCam images were mis-formatted on 18 Dec. 2019 (19352), where the cause is unknown 
but there were repeated operational issues with the CIR’s Image Processing and Storage Units 
(IPSUs) on that test day.  Fortunately, the mis-formatting was not seen on subsequent test days 
and the problematic test day was nominally repeated on 24 Jan. 2020 (20024) to make up for the 
lost science. 
 
The ACME DataCam, generally the primary camera for ACME testing, is unfortunately not as 
sensitive as had been hoped to the dim microgravity flames.  A critical challenge for s-Flame was 
in imaging the pure hydrogen and diluted hydrogen flames, which were not apparent or hardly 
visible to the DataCam and analog operations camera.  This unfortunately inhibits assessment of 
three-dimensional flame symmetry because the CFI intensified camera and Low Light Level 
Ultraviolet (LLL-UV) cameras were opposite of each other. 
 
While infrequent, tests also sometimes aborted automatically, typically due to communication 
issues with an IPSU but sometimes because test parameters were accidentally assigned out-of-
range values.  Fortunately, such aborts occurred before the start of gas flow so little was lost other 
than the time in which the aborted tests were conducted.  
 

=== PAGE 19 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
19 
 
In contrast, a combination of factors led to testing being cut short on 3 June 2020 (20155).  A high 
pressure reading (for a carrier gas) in the CIR’s Gas Chromatograph Instrumentation Package 
(GCIP) put the Fuel Oxidizer Management Assembly (FOMA) Control Unit, i.e. the FCU, in an off-
nominal state.  Rebooting the FCU inadvertently set the valve safety timers to zero, and they 
cannot be reset without venting and refilling the combustion chamber with the intended 
atmosphere.  Those issues combined with an extended loss of commanding prevented further 
science operations on that day.  However, a test day was added on 8 July 2020 (20190) to make 
up for the lost science.  
 
 
4. Preliminary Results  
A. Changed Test Plans 
To limit experiment scope, ACME investigators were asked to develop test matrices including 
nominally 50 ignitions.   The s-Flame investigators accordingly planned within that target limit 
whereas each of the other ACME experiments exceeded it, significantly so in most cases.  To 
improve the balance between the ACME investigations, the decision was made to treat s-Flame’s 
highly desired tests, featuring diluted ethylene, as required.  This was proposed by Dennis Stocker 
in 2015 (if not earlier) and adopted by 2016, where s-Flame was conducted on the ISS in 2019-
2020. 
 
Long in advance of the launch of the ACME hardware, Stocker proposed that each experiment be 
conducted in two separate rounds to allow the investigators to dig into the results from past tests 
so that they could make the best use of the remaining testing and thereby maximize the scientific 
return.  Although this plan was adopted, the limited crew availability in 2020 led to the decision 
to conduct s-Flame’s two rounds of testing sequentially.  Despite this decision, the second round 
ISS testing with flames didn’t begin until 3.5 months after it was completed for the first round.  As 
a result of this delay, the investigators did get a significant break between the test rounds even 
though ACME operations didn’t shift to a different experiment.  
 
In response to challenges with ignition during ISS tests for the preceding Coflow Laminar Diffusion 
Flame (CLD Flame) experiment in late 2017, the decision was made to develop a coil igniter as an 
alternate to the standard loop type.  Although it was later determined that the igniter had not 
been properly aligned, the decision was made to continue with the development of the coil 
igniter.  When ignition was found to be a challenge in s-Flame’s second round testing featuring 
helium dilution, the decision was made to use the coil igniter for the remainder of those tests.  
The two igniter designs are discussed and depicted in the ACME Engineering Implementation 
document.  
 
Given the ignition challenges in the second round, the decision was made to conduct some tests 
at elevated oxygen concentrations, whereas the original plan was to conduct all s-Flame tests with 
an oxygen concentration of nominally 21% (on a volume basis).  This decision is discussed in the 
preceding section, 3.B Hardware Shortcomings. 
 
A few minor changes were made to the script used to run the ISS tests:  
2020-01-14 
Added ignition detection prior to igniter arm retraction  
2020-03-11 
burnerOverLimitSec variable changed to global scope  
2020-03-13 
Fixed ramp-holds not ramping to desired flow delta  

=== PAGE 20 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
20 
 
The first change was implemented near the end of the first round of testing, while the other two 
changes were made between the two rounds.  The final version of the script is found in the  
 ACME/s-Flame Experimental Procedure document. 
 
B. Overview of Experiment Test Operations 
This section is copied from the introduction (section 1) of the April 2021 version of ‘ACME/s-Flame 
Experimental Procedure’ which should be consulted for additional details. 
 
The narrative description of the experimental procedure is an excerpt from the ‘Methods / 
Experimental’ section of the following conference paper. 
Y.-C. Chien, J. Tinajero, D. Stocker, U. Hegde, and D. Dunn-Rankin, “Electric Field Effects on 
Flames in Microgravity on the International Space Station,” 2018 Spring Technical Meeting of 
the Central States Section of The Combustion Institute, Minneapolis, MN, 20-22 May 2018. 
 
While the paper was written for the Electric-Field Effects on Laminar Diffusion Flames (E-FIELD 
Flames) experiment, much of the discussion applies to ACME in general, including the s-Flame 
investigation.  The figure referenced in this excerpt is not included herein.  Clarifications and 
additional information, not in the conference paper, are included in boxed notes like this. 
 
The CIR experiments are configured, but not conducted, by the ISS crew.  Thus far, ACME’s activity 
has included the majority of the crew members, regardless of their nationalities.  Most often the 
astronauts and cosmonauts exchange gas bottles, mass flow controllers, and igniter tips.  In the 
latter case, the igniter tip exchange can occur after failure or proactively before failure when the 
crew already has changes to make changes in the interior of the insert.  While these activities may 
seem mundane, the crew play a critical role in setting up the hardware for each experiment.  As 
an extreme example, there were crew activities on 8 separate days in Sept.-Oct. 2017 to configure 
the CIR and ACME hardware for the first ACME experiment, namely the Coflow Laminar Diffusion 
Flame (CLD Flame) experiment.  In contrast, only two crew days were required to reconfigure the 
hardware for the first E-FIELD Flames tests because of the initial use of the same coflow burner.  
Planning is critical because crew activity is scheduled three weeks in advance, for which detailed 
procedures must be prepared and uplinked to the ISS. 
 
Similarly, the s-Flame experiment was conducted using the same burner as the Flame Design 
investigation which preceded it.  However, there was hardware reconfiguration for s-Flame to 
enable use of an additional intensified camera for imaging OH* chemiluminescence, namely the 
Low Light Level Ultraviolet (LLL-UV) camera. 
 
All CIR tests are remotely commanded from the ground from NASA’s Glenn ISS Payload Operations 
Center (GIPOC) in Cleveland, Ohio.  Typically, four to six people staff four consoles during the 
testing.  The CIR hardware is controlled from the Rack Officer (RO) and Data Management Officer 
(DMO) consoles, and the ACME hardware is controlled from the Payload Developer (PD) console.  
Two shifts of personnel are scheduled to staff these three consoles on test days because they 
typically last 14 hours with the many pre- and post-testing activities.  Given that the tests are 
remotely commanded, the operations are carried out in the day and evening in Cleveland, e.g., 
from 7 AM to 9 PM.  A day’s tests, i.e., with flames, are normally conducted in a period of 10 hours 
of less.  Tests are normally conducted on three weekdays per two weeks.  On intervening 
weekdays, the image data is downlinked and the crew often swap one or both gas bottles.  

=== PAGE 21 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
21 
 
Transferring and downlinking data from a day’s tests also requires a 2-shift day for the RO and 
DMO consoles, where it is always necessary to verify that data was downlinked without errors 
and that data is not missing.  Those two positions are also staffed to guide and oversee the crew 
activity.  As a result, the CIR consoles are normally actively staffed on four weekdays per week.  A 
team of four carry out the detailed planning for the CIR and ACME console staff, and the daily 
operational plans typically exceed 50 pages on days including testing. 
 
The science console allows for review of the analog video and non-imaging telemetry (at 1 Hz) in 
near real time but doesn’t allow for commanding.  In the case of E-FIELD Flames, arrangements 
were made so that the analog video is streamed to a secure computer at UC Irvine to allow the 
research team to participate in test operations and to recommend adjustments to the day’s 
planned parameters.  That team does not see the telemetry during the testing, but is in 
communication via phone and e-mail with their NASA research partners at the GRC ISS Payload 
Operations Center (GIPOC).  While there are many preparatory steps, the tests are ultimately 
conducted using an uploaded software script and parameter files.  In advance of the test day, the 
UC Irvine science team plans the nearly 60 parameters in the voltage sweep script and specifies 
other parameters that are configured outside of the script, such as camera settings.  It is also 
possible to effectively conduct tests in a ‘manual’ mode, where parameters are changed in 
response to the analog video downlink or telemetry.  For example, the electric field potential can 
be adjusted to approach a stability or soot limit. 
 
Provisions have been made to enable the investigators from all ACME experiments to remotely 
view the analog video while they communicated verbally with NASA science personnel in the 
operations center.  Thus far, all ACME flame tests, including those for s-Flame and E-FIELD Flames, 
have been conducted in an automated manner using software scripts and extensive parameter 
files. 
 
Typically, ten E-FIELD Flames tests are conducted per test day. Despite the short test durations, 
the low rate results from several unavoidable factors.  After a test is conducted, the 125-Hz non-
imaging data is downlinked for immediate review by the science team.  A small sample of images 
are often downlinked to ensure that the camera exposures are appropriate, where the times for 
those images are typically selected based on non-imaging data to provide extreme examples.  The 
review helps to verify parameters or plan for adjustments in subsequent tests, e.g., to select the 
voltage range after determining where the ion current saturates for the given flame conditions.  
After a test is conducted, a fan circulates the chamber atmosphere after which the chamber is 
vented (to space) back to atmospheric pressure, if needed.  Midway through a day’s E-FIELD 
Flames tests, the atmosphere is circulated for 15 minutes through a filter cartridge filled with 
molecular sieves to capture any soot and adsorb at least a portion of the combustion products, 
e.g., carbon dioxide, water vapor, and incomplete combustion products.  The tests are only 
conducted when both Ku and S band communication is available through NASA’s Tracking and 
Data Relay Satellite (TDRS) System.  Depending on the various orbits, there are periodic 
communication outages with a loss of signal (LOS) that can be a short handover (from one satellite 
to another) or can last as long as 30 minutes. 
 
In contrast to E-FIELD Flames, an average of 15 flames were ignited per test day for s-Flame, but 
they were of even shorter durations. The pressure rise with an s-Flame test was small and the 
chamber was rarely vented after a test unless the chamber atmosphere was being adjusted for 

=== PAGE 22 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
22 
 
other purposes.  In this regard, the chamber atmosphere was sometimes scrubbed for the s-Flame 
investigation by recirculating it through the adsorber cartridge, but this was not a regular routine 
as in the case of E-FIELD Flames.  The chamber was also sometimes partially or completely vented 
and refilled during s-Flame operations, for example to adjust the atmosphere’s oxygen 
concentration. 
 
Unlike E-FIELD Flames, the s-Flame experiment also made use of the CIR’s Gas Chromatograph 
Instrumentational Package (GCIP) to measure species concentrations of the atmosphere in the 
combustion chamber.  There is no sampling probe and measurements are only made before, 
between, or after tests when the chamber atmosphere was ‘stirred’ through use of a fan.  For s-
Flame, the GC measurements were made on most but not all test days, but they were limited in 
scope because of the significant time required.  The GC measurements were sometimes only made 
at the end of the test day but were occasionally made earlier in the day, for example prior to an 
adjustment of the chamber atmosphere. 
 
A variety of constraints limit the number of tests that can be performed, both overall and on a 
daily basis.  The next combustion experiments in the CIR will feature solid fuels and focus on flame 
spread and material flammability.  That follow-on plan limits the duration of ACME operations, 
where each ACME experiment is allotted four months for testing.  Although it requires additional 
crew time, these allotments are split into two rounds so that the investigators have a break from 
testing for careful review of the early results so that they can maximize the scientific outcome of 
their second round.  This paper reports on early results from the first round of E-FIELD Flames. 
 
In contrast to earlier plans, the two rounds of the s-Flame experiment occurred sequentially 
because of limited crew availability.  Due to delays in commercial crew transport, the space station 
had three rather six crew members through much of 2020.  As a result of the reduced crew size, 
the s-Flame investigators did get a 3-month break (in Feb. to April) between their two rounds of 
flame tests allowing them to study early results and prepare for the second round.   Hardware 
issues also stretched out s-Flame operations in the latter half of 2019.   
 
While nitrogen is available from the space station, the combustion testing is limited by the 
available gas bottles that were and are launched to support the tests.  For E-FIELD Flames and 
most of ACME’s experiments, the test matrices used to plan those gas resources were established 
in 2010.  At that time, NASA limited the scope of the ACME tests matrices with the intent of 
focused experiments with limited objectives rather than comprehensive experiments.  As such, 
the general target was 50 tests per experiment.  For most ACME experiments, the limiting gas 
constraint is the oxygen/nitrogen bottles used to fill the chamber.  This resource constraint is 
exacerbated by the CIR because it is equipped with a pair of redundant safety timers to limit the 
fuel that can flow into the combustion chamber (where the timers can be set for the oxidizer flow 
in the case of inverse flame testing).  The timers can only be reset by venting the combustion 
chamber.  Therefore, the timer limit combined with other constraints effectively corresponds to 
the day’s maximum flow time for the fuel (or more generally, the limiting reactant).  For E-FIELD 
Flames, the safety timers are set to the maximum value of 999 seconds, which corresponds to the 
10 tests typically completed per day. 
 
The second round of the s-Flame experiment featured helium dilution of both the fuel and the 
oxidizer, so its testing was also limited by the oxygen/helium bottles launched for that purpose. 

=== PAGE 23 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
23 
 
 
The 999-second limit on the valve safety timers has thus far been common for all ACME testing.  
However, the timers can be reset to 999 by nearly completely venting the chamber.  Sufficient time 
and gas resources are needed to vent and refill the chamber and still conduct tests afterward and 
that was only occasionally done for s-Flame. 
 
Another constraint is the available time in a day, where the console personnel and ISS resources, 
such as the video downlink, are planned for a limited number of hours.  When necessary for the 
research, NASA does have continuous 24-hour/day operations for some non-CIR experiments.  
But as discussed, the ACME tests are typically two minutes or less in duration, so the testing is 
almost always limited to the planned durations. 
 
Data limits are yet another constraint, where the on-orbit hardware can store a limited amount 
of data.  More importantly, 127,000 MB is the most that can be reasonably managed in a two-
shift transfer and downlink day.  Therefore, tests days are limited to this amount of data, where 
image data from select cameras is often archived at reduced rates to mitigate this challenge.  
Nonetheless, the limit sometimes forces decisions to abandon recorded images. 
 
This detailed description of operations and hardware provides the context under which the ACME 
experiments are conducted.  …  
 
 
 

=== PAGE 24 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
24 
 
Meanwhile, Table 1 is a summary log of the flames ignited, including a limited overview of the test 
conditions, where it is an excerpt from this report’s Appendix D. 30-Day Operational 
Accomplishments Report for ISS Increment 63.  Note that it is comprehensive and includes the 
earlier testing conducted in the preceding increments. 
 
Table 1. Flames ignited for the s-Flame experiment 
Test 
Day1 
Year Month Date 
Atmosphere2 
Fuel bottle 
Flames 
ignited3 
First round of tests, with nitrogen-diluted fuel and oxygen 
19254 
2019 
9 
11 
~21% O2 with N2 
50% C2H4 with N2 
13 
19256 
13 
16 
19304 
10 
31 
45% CH4 with N2 
9 
19308 
11 
4 
~30% O2 with N2 
21 
19352 
12 
18 
~21% O2, with N2 
100% H2 
10 
20006 
2020 
1 
6 
44.4% H2 with CH4 
17 
20013 
13 
66.7% H2 with CH4 
22 
20024 
24 
100% H2 
16 
20029 
29 
50% C2H4 with N2 
21 
Second round of tests, with helium-diluted fuel and oxygen 
20132 
2020 
5 
11 
~21% O2 with He 
25% H2, 20% CH4, 
with He 
7 
20136 
15 
20% H2, 25% CH4, 
with He 
11 
20142 
21 
~30% O2 with He 
30% H2, 15% CH4, 
with He 
17 
20155 
6 
3 
~30% and ~21% O2 
with He 
45% H2 with He 
9 
20160 
8 
45% CH4 with He 
12 
20164 
12 
~30% O2 with He 
20% C2H4 with He 
11 
20170 
18 
~30% and ~21% O2 
with He 
25% C2H4 with He 
20 
20176 
24 
30% C2H4 with He 
23 
20190 
7 
8 
45% H2 with He 
21 
1Test Day includes the year as the first two digits followed by the 3-digit day of the year. 
2Atmosphere is ~1 atm but pressure increases and O2% drops with vitiation.  
3Flames ignited is the number of nominally sustained flames ignited on that day 
(neglecting the day change on ISS). 
 
 
 

=== PAGE 25 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
25 
 
C. Summary of Preliminary Results  
The s-Flame experiment aims to characterize and gain predictive capability of the structure and 
dynamics of diffusion flames in simple, well-defined flow fields such that the phenomena of 
interest can be studied without being complicated by various flow field effects.  The basic flame 
configuration adopted for the investigation is the spherically symmetric diffusion flame generated 
by discharging a fuel gas from a porous spherical burner into a quiescent, oxidizing atmosphere 
in microgravity.  The theoretically one-dimensional nature of the system facilitates data 
acquisition, data reduction, and computational simulation.  The s-Flame experiment uses the 
Combustion Integrated Rack (CIR) and the ACME hardware in the Destiny module of the ISS. 
 
Specifically, the s-Flame tests are intended to:  
(i) Advance our ability to predict the structure and dynamics, including extinction, of both 
soot-free and sooty flames; 
(ii) Obtain experimental data in simple, well-defined flow fields and understand various key 
elemental diffusion flame processes; 
(iii) Identify the extinction limits for both radiative and convective extinction (i.e., at high and 
low system Damköhler numbers, respectively); 
(iv) Determine the existence, onset, and nature of pulsating instabilities that have been 
theoretically predicted to occur in such flames with fuel/diluent mixtures that are above 
a critical Lewis number; 
(v) Validate and/or improve accuracy of computational simulation including detailed 
chemistry and transport. 
 
The project has completed two (2) rounds of microgravity experimentation.  Currently, detailed 
analyses of the acquired data, computational simulation, and theoretical analysis are ongoing.  
Interpretation of all phenomena will emphasize the simultaneous and coupled influence of 
chemistry and transport. 
 
Table 1, on the preceding page, summarizes the tests conducted for two rounds of tests, which 
are meant to address the scientific objectives listed above.  All experimental data address 
transient phenomenon, as the flame evolves from localized ignition towards “steady” behavior.  
The flames then evolve in a quasi-steady state manner (becoming history independent), after a 
short initial transient.  Conventional gaseous fuels including hydrogen, methane, and ethylene are 
used.  Hydrogen is the simplest fuel and its reaction mechanism is also reasonably established.  
Methane is the simplest hydrocarbon, and extensive studies have been conducted on its 
combustion chemistry.  Ethylene is a typical sooty fuel and is also an important intermediate for 
the oxidation of higher hydrocarbons.  Diluents mixed with fuel include nitrogen and helium to 
adjust mixture diffusivities and characteristic flame temperature. 
 
The rationale for the matrix of tests is to utilize various mixtures to assess both chemical and 
transport effects (including radiative) on flame behavior.  Pure H2 and pure CH4 are utilized to 
assess kinetic mechanisms associated with each.  Additionally, pure H2 only produces H2O as its 
radiative product, thereby isolating its radiative properties.  Mixtures composed of both H2 and 
CH4 are used to examine their combined chemical and transport effects.  N2 and He inerts which 
affect characteristic flame temperature and transport (molecular and radiative), in the same mole 

=== PAGE 26 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
26 
 
fractions, are utilized for comparison.   
 
As seen in Table 1, the first round of tests examined nitrogen-diluted fuel burning in a nitrogen-
diluted oxidizing atmosphere. 
 
Test day 19254 examines nitrogen-diluted C2H4 issuing into 21% O2 / 79% N2 atmosphere.  C2H4 
allows for the examination of a fuel with nominal unity Le number, setting a baseline standard for 
flame stretch and thermal diffusive stability effects.  Additionally, its characteristic sooting nature 
(in normal gravity) directly addresses our basic science objectives focusing on spreading of flame 
sheets, dual extinction states, and flame-front instabilities.  For a case of fuel-mixture of 20% C2H4 
/ 80% N2 at a flow rate of 3 cc/s, a seemingly quasi-steady flame is attained for extended duration.  
For the same mixture, higher flow rates of 5-10 cc/s result in radiative extinctions, corresponding 
to high system Damköhler number.  Other mixtures of 25% C2H4 / 75% N2 and 30% C2H4 / 70% N2, 
also show radiative extinctions at higher flow rates.  Since characteristic residence times will affect 
sooting tendencies, various flow rates are investigated for different mixtures.  Soot is only 
observed during ignition, which goes away as the flames establish themselves, as seen for cases 
where low flow rates (e.g., 3 cc/s) with low ethylene contents (e.g., 25-30% C2H4) are ramped to 
high flow rates (e.g., 5-10 cc/s) with higher ethylene contents (e.g., 40-50% C2H4).  Soot will also 
enhance flame radiation, but our non-sooty flames already extinguish as they spread outwardly.  
Observations of such radiative extinction behavior at high flow rates is an achievement because 
such phenomenon was not observed conclusively in our ground-based studies, given the limited 
microgravity durations. Radiative reabsorption extends flame size at extinction. In ISS testing, 
radiative extinction has been found to be a common event, which was predicted computationally, 
but not definitively observed previously for our flame conditions. 
 
Test day 19256 uses nitrogen-diluted C2H4 issuing into 21% O2 / 79% N2 atmosphere to examine 
kinetic extinction at low system Damköhler numbers.  Similar to the radiative extinction cases, 
sufficient microgravity duration is needed to observe kinetic extinction because a near steady 
flame needs to be established first, before ramp down in flow rate to find properly the chemical 
kinetic extinction limit.  For mixtures with 20-30% C2H4 content, spherical non-sooty flames are 
established at 3 cc/s; and kinetic extinctions are observed during ramp down before reaching 1 
cc/s.  For the same mixtures, radiative extinctions are observed when the non-sooty flames are 
established at 3 cc/s and the flow rates are ramped up before reaching 8 cc/s.  Quantitative 
determination of the states of flame extinction, especially the dual extinction modes at high and 
low system Damköhler numbers have been achieved experimentally and are being compared to 
computational simulation. 
 
Test day 19304 investigates 45% CH4 / 55% N2 mixtures issuing into 21% O2 / 79% N2 atmosphere.  
This pure-fuel methane case is used to compare with CH4/H2 blend mixtures.  However, quasi-
steady flames could not be established for the given fuel MFC (0.5 slpm).  Consequently, the 19308 
tests investigate the nitrogen-diluted methane flames in increased oxygen atmosphere, i.e., 30% 
O2 / 70% N2.  Methane concentrations from 45% down to 15% are varied.  For 45% CH4 / 55% N2, 
relatively long duration flames of ~15 s and ~10 s are established at flow rates of 2 cc/s and 3 cc/s, 
respectively.  At larger flow rates of 5 and 9.4 cc/s, the flames expand to large radii and then 
extinguish, demonstrating radiative extinction at high system Damköhler number.  Reduction of 
flow rate from 2 cc/s to 1 cc/s results in extinction during ramp down, indicating kinetic extinction 
at low system Damköhler number.  For 30% CH4 / 70% N2, flow rates of 3-10 cc/s produce flames 
that expand to radiative extinction; and reduction of flow rate from 3 to 1 cc/s contracted to 

=== PAGE 27 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
27 
 
kinetic extinction.  Similar results are obtained for mixtures of 25% CH4 / 75% N2 and 20% CH4 / 
80% N2.  For 15% CH4 / 85% N2, flames are ignited, but extinguish soon after.  These tests of 19308 
suggest that like ethylene, methane flames can manifest both radiative and kinetic extinction for 
the conditions specified.  We are currently mapping computationally the quasi-steady isola 
response for these flames to compare with the experimental extinction responses. 
 
Test day 19352 was intended to examine various concentrations of nitrogen-diluted H2 (45%-70%) 
issuing into air.  However, various technical problems manifested that necessitated re-running of 
the tests on 20024 (as a make-up test day). 
 
Test day 20006 examines 20% H2 / 25% CH4 / 55% N2 mixtures issuing into air.  Mixture of methane 
and hydrogen will be compared to those of pure fuels of methane and hydrogen to address 
chemical kinetic and transport aspects.  With regard to radiative extinction, mixture compositions 
of 20% H2 / 25% CH4 / 55% N2, 25% H2 / 20% CH4 / 55% N2, and 30% H2 / 15% CH4 / 55% N2 have 
been shown in computational simulations to be characterized by different radiative extinction 
times.  These mixtures also avoid sooty ignition, which can otherwise result in asymmetrically 
trapped soot that deteriorates flame sphericity.  For this mixture, the flames extinguish, some 
with wavy oscillating behavior just prior.  However, it seems that even for very small flow rates, 
e.g., 2 cc/s, extinction is by the radiative mechanism during flame expansion.  There was no 
parameter space in terms of flow rate and burner size to identify conclusively kinetic extinction 
during ramp down for these mixtures.  Radiative extinction (with local flame extinction and re-
ignition seems to occur prior to ultimate extinguishment) during flame expansion after ignition is 
observed. 
 
Test day 20013 mainly investigates 30% H2 /15% CH4 / 55% N2 mixtures issuing into air.  Again, 
mixture of methane and hydrogen are run to compare with pure fuels of methane and hydrogen.  
Note that 25% H2/ 20% CH4 / 55% N2 mixtures could not be run on the ISS because the mixture 
bottles had leaked.  Radiative extinction is difficult to identify conclusively because flames with 
larger flow rates, e.g. 15 cc/s, seem to last, although with patchy extinction areas, until time out.  
Larger flow rates could not be examined either because of limited MFC range or distorted flame 
shape caused by burner limitations at high flow rates.  Also, kinetic extinction during ramp down 
could not be identified conclusively, as some flames seem to extinguish because they contract 
into the burner. 
 
Test day 20024 is a makeup day for 19352 – when the 0.1-slpm fuel MFC range was too low to 
examine radiative extinction and the analog and intensified cameras did not pick up the flame 
images at all or well – examining nitrogen-diluted H2.  Here, a 0.5-slpm fuel MFC is used and only 
a fused silica filter is used for the intensified camera.  45%-15% H2/N2 balance mixtures are 
investigated, where flames at high flow rates, e.g., 10 cc/s, did not extinguish, appearing quasi-
steady until time out.  The hydrogen flames would likely need to reach a diameter much larger 
than that accommodated by the experiment to extinguish radiatively.  The flames seem to 
extinguish during ramp down, but further analysis is needed to assess kinetic extinction at low 
Damköhler number. 
 
Test day 20029 uses and repeats and augments conditions of 19256 – when the images were 
corrupt – for nitrogen-diluted ethylene flames.  Again, the results indicate both kinetic and 
radiative extinction phenomena under corresponding conditions.  No sooting flames are 
observed. 

=== PAGE 28 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
28 
 
 
As seen in Table 1, the second round of tests replaces the inert, N2, with He, to better isolate Le>1 
instabilities.  However, higher characteristic flame temperatures (given the lower molar heat 
capacity of monatomic He versus that of diatomic N2) correspond to lower Zeldovich numbers, 
which would suppress oscillations based on Sivashinsky’s criterion for premixed flames.  
Moreover, lower Ze may also affect extinction processes. 
 
Test day 20132 examines helium-diluted fuel mixture of 25% H2 / 20% CH4 / 55% He issuing into 
an ambient of 21% O2 / 79% He.  The high thermal conductivity of He drastically shifts the ignition 
parameters from that using N2 as inert in Round 1.  The tests produced flames at 3-10 cc/s that 
expand outwardly quickly and extinguish.  For 5-10 cc/s, the flames seemed to disappear and 're-
ignite' with a "flash" before final extinction.  We are currently investigating the flash phenomenon. 
 
Test day 20136 investigates the fuel blend 20% H2 / 25% CH4 / 55% He issuing into 21% O2 / 79% 
He.  For 5 cc/s and 7 cc/s, the mixture ignites but immediately extinguishes, with almost no 
observable flame-front expansion.  For 10-17.5 cc/s, the mixtures ignite, expand quickly, and 
extinguish.  The extinction mechanism is believed to be radiative and is being assessed with 
computational simulations.  For the cases with a ramp down in flow rate, the flames seem to 
extinguish before ramp down. Thus, purely kinetic extinction could not be assessed.  Only flow 
rates above 7 cc/s showed flame-front expansion leading to extinction, with 17.5 cc/s showing a 
flash or wavering of the flame surface before final extinction. 
 
Test day 20142 investigates the fuel blend 30% H2 / 15% CH4 / 55% He issuing into 30% O2/ 70% 
He.  Elevated oxygen ambient facilitates ignition and results in smaller characteristic flame size.  
For 5-16.5 cc/s flow rates, flames expand to wavy/oscillatory radiative extinction.  Ramp down 
cases did not allow for assessment of kinetic extinction. 
 
Test day 20155 examines 45% H2 / 55% He issuing into 30% O2/ 70% He and 21% O2 / 79% He.  
Radiative and kinetic extinction processes are not conclusively identified for these cases because 
the automated protocol ended the tests as the burner temperature routinely reached 250°C.  
Presumably, the thermally-conductive He diluent augments heat transfer to the burner.  
Nevertheless, nice transient flames are produced, such that the transient flame structure (e.g., 
temperature and species distribution) can be characterized by the ACME diagnostics and 
compared with computational simulation and theoretical analysis, along with cross comparisons 
with the N2 inert cases of Round 1. 
 
Test day 20160 investigates 45% CH4 / 55% He issuing into 30% O2 / 70% He and 21% O2 / 79% He.  
For the 30% O2/ 70% He atmosphere, the 5-15 cc/s flow rates are sooty at ignition, but 
subsequently become non-sooty, expanding to radiative extinction.  At 6 and 7 cc/s, flames ignite 
less sooty, expanding with no soot to radiative extinction.  For tests comprising 21% O2 / 79% He 
atmosphere, at 5-15 cc/s, flames ignite sooty, but dissipate, and expand quickly to radiative 
extinction. 
 
Test day 20164 studies ethylene-based flames, where 20% C2H4 / 80% He issues into 30% O2 / 70% 
He and 21% O2 / 79% He atmospheres.  For 5 cc/s issuing into 30% O2 / 70% He, the flame expands 
and remains quasi-steady until the burner limit temperature (250°C) is reached and the 
experiment shuts down.  At 6-15 cc/s, the flames expand to radiative extinction, with the higher 
flow rates at 10-15 cc/s exhibiting sooty ignition.  Fuel flow of 5.5 cc/s seems to correspond to a 

=== PAGE 29 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
29 
 
condition where the onset of oscillating/wavy extinction is concurrent with the burner reaching 
the 250°C temperature limit.  For the cases with a ramp down in flow rate, the flames seem to 
extinguish during ramp down, but heat loss to the burner may be the mechanism for extinction 
rather than kinetic extinction.  Ignition is not achieved for tests conducted with 21% O2 / 79% He 
atmosphere, for the ignition parameters utilized. 
 
Test day 20170 investigates 25% C2H4 / 75% He issuing into 30% O2 / 70% He and 21% O2 / 79% 
He.  At 5 and 5.5 cc/s issuing into 30% O2 / 70% He, blue chemiluminescent flames are ignited, but 
eventually cut off because of the burner temperature limit being reached.  At 6 cc/s, a blue 
chemiluminescent flame expands slowly to radiative extinction.  At 7-15 cc/s, sooty ignition 
occurs, but the soot goes away as the flames expand toward radiative extinction.  By ramping the 
flow rates up, starting at 5 cc/s, soot at ignition is minimized.  Ramp down of the flow rate results 
in almost immediate extinction.  For tests at 21% O2 / 79% He atmosphere, cases at 5-15 cc/s 
produce flames that expand quickly to extinction.  Less soot is present at ignition compared to 
those for 30% O2 / 70% He atmospheres. 
 
Test day 20176 explores 30% C2H4 / 70% He issuing into 30% O2 / 70% He and 21% O2 / 79% He.  
For 30% O2 / 70% He, at 5 cc/s, a long duration flame is established that eventually reaches the 
burner temperature limit.  At 6-15 cc/s, the flames are sooty at ignition, but the soot dissipates; 
and the flames expand to radiative extinction.  Ramping up the flow rates, starting at 5 cc/s, 
minimizes soot at ignition and results in flames that slowly expand to radiative extinction.  For 
tests at 21% O2/ 79% He atmosphere, cases at 5-15 cc/s produce flames that expand to radiative 
extinction.  Ramp down of the flow rate did not produce flames that could confirm kinetic 
extinction. 
 
Test day 20190 is a makeup of 20155, with 45% H2 / 55% He issuing into 30% O2 / 70% He and 
21% O2 / 79% He.  For both oxygen concentration environments, flow rates resulting in expanding 
flames lasted for a while but were cut off by automated protocol for burner temperature limit 
before radiative extinction.  As for cases where the flow rates are ramped down, extinction 
detection is observed for both oxygen concentration environments.  It is not clear if extinction is 
kinetic or from heat loss to the burner.  Detailed analyses are needed.  Tests with a reduced 
oxygen concentration atmosphere of 17.5% O2 / 82.5% He seems to show both radiative and 
kinetic extinction.  Additional analyses are needed. 
 
D. Surprises and New Discoveries  
Many discoveries are expected to arise as the data is analyzed and computational simulations are 
compared.  Initial surprises and discoveries include: 
 
(1) Nitrogen-diluted methane and ethylene flames in air seem to demonstrate kinetic extinction 
at low flow rates (low system Da) and radiative extinction at high flow rates (high system Da).  
Such phenomena were not observed in our ground-based research, given the limited 
microgravity durations.  Nevertheless, comparisons with computational simulations are 
needed to assess better the extinction behavior.  Radiative reabsorption extends flame size 
at extinction, making the chamber size an important parameter.  Surprisingly, radiative 
extinction has been found to be a common event in ISS testing, which was predicted 
computationally, but not observed previously for our flame conditions.  Similarly, sufficient 
microgravity duration is needed to observe kinetic extinction because a near steady flame 

=== PAGE 30 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
30 
 
need to be established first, before ramp down in flow rate to find properly the chemical 
kinetic extinction limit.  The nitrogen-diluted methane flames were tested in air and enriched 
O2 environments.  The enriched O2 environments produce smaller characteristic flames; 
nonetheless, both extinction limits appear to have been observed. 
(2) Ethylene flames which tend to soot under normal gravity conditions did not soot under 
microgravity conditions.  Sooting only occurred during forced ignition from the hotwire, but 
soon dissipated.  Inherent sooting was also not found for enriched oxidizer conditions or for 
either of the inerts, i.e., N2 and He, examined. 
(3) Nitrogen-diluted hydrogen flames seem to need to be at very large characteristic sizes to self-
extinguish.  As such, radiative extinction was not observed for the cases run, despite lowering 
the H2 concentration.  However, kinetic extinction during ramp down seem to be exhibited 
for hydrogen flames. 
(4) Nitrogen-diluted hydrogen/methane mixture flames manifested radiative extinction, as 
predicted by computational simulations.  However, kinetic extinction at low flow rates could 
not be identified conclusively.  The characteristic extinction radius may be within the burner 
radius, precluding experimental identification.  More analyses of the data are needed. 
(5) Helium-diluted cases had shifted extinction limits with respect to the nitrogen-diluted cases.  
In general, kinetic extinction was difficult to observe for the conditions examined.  Ignition 
was also severely affected by using He as diluent.  More analyses are needed to assess 
instability near the flame limits, which was predicted to occur computationally. 
(6)  The He inert cases are meant to better isolate pulsating instabilities that are theoretically 
predicted to occur in transient spherical diffusion flames using fuel/diluent mixtures that are 
above a critical Lewis number.  However, such instabilities were not conclusively observed in 
the ISS tests, at least from the video images.  Radiometer and PMT data will need to be 
examined in detail. 
(7)  The highly thermal conductive nature of He seems to affect various processes, such as 
ignition and heat transfer to the burner (affecting isolation of kinetic extinction), despite 
higher characteristic flame temperatures. 
 (8)  Flame luminosity does not necessarily correspond with flame strength (or combustion 
intensity).  
 
E. Accomplishment of Approved Objectives 
The ISS experimental matrix was proposed to address the following specific objectives, in both 
soot-free and sooty flames.  Comparisons with detailed computational simulation will permit 
assessment of transport properties and detailed chemical kinetics (including chemiluminescence).  
The accomplishment aspect is given after the statement of each objective. 
 
Objective A.  Measure and characterize the transient structure (such as temperature and species 
distribution) of diffusion flames established at initially non-steady, spherical flame structures for 
mixtures of different H2/CH4/diluent ratios (soot-free) and different C2H4/diluent ratios (sooty), for 
different flow rates. 
 
Transient flames, both expanding and contracting, were achieved for all fuel mixtures.  Some 
flames appeared to be quasi-steady in their evolution from a non-steady ignition origin.  

=== PAGE 31 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
31 
 
Characterization of the flame structures is still being done, e.g., analyzing and processing data 
from thin-filament pyrometry to determine the temperature distribution.  Species distribution is 
not explicitly measured and would need to be inferred from data such as radiometry.  
Characteristically sooty flames were not observed.  Transient sooting only occurred during forced 
ignition; however, the ignition process and associated phenomena are being analyzed.  Transient 
oscillatory/wavy response of the flame surface prior to extinction was often observed and is being 
analyzed. 
 
Objective B.  Determine the quasi-steady convective/chemical-kinetic extinction limits (low system 
Damköhler numbers) and radiative/chemical-kinetic extinction limits (high system Damköhler 
numbers) for mixtures of different H2/CH4/diluent ratios (soot-free) and different C2H4/diluent 
ratios (sooty). 
 
Nitrogen-diluted ethylene and methane evinced both radiative and kinetic extinctions.  Nitrogen-
diluted hydrogen/methane blends only demonstrated radiative extinction for the parameters 
tested.  Nitrogen-diluted hydrogen cases may have indicated kinetic extinction, but more analyses 
are needed.  Helium-diluted hydrogen/methane blends may have shown radiative extinction, but 
more analyses are needed.  Helium-diluted hydrogen displayed radiative extinction and showed 
kinetic extinction for oxygen-reduced environments.  Helium-diluted ethylene and methane 
exhibited radiative extinction. 
 
None of the flames were inherently sooty, so the effect of soot on extinction could not be 
investigated. 
 
Objective C.  Determine the existence (for different Zeldovich number, Ze), onset (as a function 
Da), and nature (i.e., mode, frequency, amplitude) of pulsating instabilities theoretically predicted 
to occur in transient spherical diffusion flames using fuel/diluent mixtures that are above a critical 
Lewis number. 
 
Many flames presented unstable behavior near the burner tube prior to extinction, likely because 
of lack of fuel mixture and heat loss in that region, rather than inherent pulsating instability.  
However, additional analyses, especially of PMT and radiometer data, are needed to assess the 
existent of pulsating instability, especially for helium as diluent. 
 
F. Additional Objectives Achieved 
No additional objectives have yet to be achieved.  However, as we analyze and interpret the data, 
we expect new discoveries and insights into the fundamental mechanisms.  Computational 
simulations will augment some test cases, and comparisons with experimental data will allow for 
extraction of basic parameters and assessment of chemical kinetic mechanisms.  The role of the 
inerts will be better revealed, as the tests showed that they are far from passive participants in 
the flame dynamics and responses. 
 
Some additional objectives that may be achieved in the future would involve the following aspects 
given below. 
 
(A) Some experimental cases involved initial ramp up with subsequent ramp down in the flow 
rate, which may reveal hysteresis in the flame response. 

=== PAGE 32 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
32 
 
(B) The acquired data will allow for investigation of flame ignition and transient dynamics in 
2D and 3D geometry, along with analysis of the emergence and dynamics of 2D and 3D 
wave patterns for near-limit spherical diffusion flames, and analysis of their role in flame 
extinction. 
 
G. Impacts, Benefits, and Products 
The impact of this work consists of both practical and fundamental aspects.  Practically, with 
diffusion flame burning as the basis in many combustion engines and devices, understanding the 
underlying dynamics and chemistry of diffusion flames is important in improving performance in 
terms of power, efficiency, pollutant emissions, and reliability.  Fundamentally, the unique 
buoyancy-free environment offered by microgravity affords simple aerodynamic flow fields to 
acquire diffusion flame data of high fidelity, with the prospect of understanding unit 
thermochemical processes as well as quantifying the associated physico-chemical parameters. 
 
In analyzing and validating the data sets, the experimental data and corresponding computational 
simulations should yield quantitative and qualitative understanding of various elemental flame 
phenomena.  In studying the transient motion of diffusion flames ignited from a non-steady-state 
initial condition, the significance of fuel accumulation will be evaluated, which was originally 
found to be important in droplet burning.  Here, with no droplet surface regression nor coupling 
of fuel flow to heat transfer from the flame to influence flame-front motion, the effect can be 
better isolated and the far-field unsteadiness assessed.  Quantitative predictability of the flame 
motion permits assessment of the parameters and mechanisms involved in radiation loss and re-
absorption as well as other transport parameters.  The microgravity environment greatly 
facilitates the examination of pulsating instabilities, which can be hidden or coupled to other 
processes in normal gravity.  Moreover, involvement of multi-dimensional effects, rather than the 
nominally 1-D geometry here, would further complicate the manifestation of the phenomenon.  
Near-limit phenomena, including extinction, is best evaluated and validated using our one-
dimensional spherical diffusion flame (as realized in the microgravity environment), which is 
probably the most desirable flame configuration for study of this nature.  Understanding 
extinction phenomenon is paramount to revealing basic flame processes, along with highlighting 
implications in fire safety. 
 
The results are of strong interest to other groups working on diffusion flames, including those also 
doing ISS-based experiments.  The main products will be (i) insights from fundamental 
characterization of transient dynamics and responses of such flames, (ii) categorization of 
processes that are either quasi-steady (e.g., expanding flame front motion toward steady state) 
or fully transient (e.g., pulsating instabilities prior to extinction), (iii) quantitative and qualitative 
mapping of extinction boundaries and unstable regimes, (iv) clarification of the role of diluents in 
various processes, and (v) additional understanding of ignition in non-premixed flames.  Engines 
and devices on Earth can be improved in efficiency, pollutant emissions, and dependability from 
such products. 
 
H. Patents 
No patents have been filed from the s-Flame research, yet. 
 
 
 

=== PAGE 33 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
33 
 
5. Follow-On Experiments 
Although two rounds of testing have been completed, with no further testing planned, if a third round 
becomes available, there are two main types of experiments that we would like to implement. 
 
We would like to examine the same fuel mixtures (plus C3H8 as mentioned below) of the first two rounds, 
but with CO2 as inert, including that for the ambient.  N2 and He are radiatively transparent gases; while 
CO2 is an optically participating gas.  Use of CO2 should result in a characteristically lower flame 
temperature, increasing the Zeldovich number, Ze.  At the same time, the highly reabsorptive CO2 species 
can minimize net radiative heat loss affecting flame dynamics and extinction.  Objectives A, B, and C would 
be addressed by these experiments. 
 
Additionally, characteristically sooty flames were not observed in the first two rounds for the fuel mixtures 
tested.  As such, we would like to investigate using C3H8 as fuel, which was originally specified in the SRD 
that was approved [in 2002, but which was not part of the s-Flame plan under ACME, which didn’t begin 
until 2006].  Specific knowledge originally sought in the first two rounds with respect to sooty flames, 
which were not achieved consist of:  (a) the transient and steady state behavior and structure of sooting 
spherical flames, (b) residence time effect on soot formation, with only curvature effects and no strain, 
and (c) the effects of soot radiation and transport on extinction, at constant mass flow rate. 
 
The results so far will be compared with computational simulations to address deficiencies in fundamental 
parameters and models.  The aforementioned CO2 experiments are highly desired; however, 
experimentation with C3H8 is of utmost importance if we are to achieve our original objectives with 
respect to characteristically sooty flames, which were not attained for the fuel mixtures and conditions 
tested in the first two rounds. 
 
 

=== PAGE 34 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
34 
 
Appendix A. Abbreviations and Acronyms 
 
##### 
ACME days are identified by year (2 digits) and the day of the year (3 digits, 001-366) 
 
#####x# 
ACME tests are identified by day (5 digits; see above), a letter, and a 1-digit number 
 
0-g 
microgravity 
 
1-g 
normal gravity (on the surface of the Earth) 
ACME 
Advanced Combustion via Microgravity Experiments (CIR project) 
ADP 
Acceptance Data Package 
ASGSR 
American Society for Gravitational and Space Research 
AVP 
avionics package 
BRE 
Burning Rate Emulator (an ACME experiment) 
C2H4 
ethylene 
C3H8 
propane 
CH2O 
formaldehyde 
CASIS 
Center for the Advancement of Science in Space 
CCD 
Charge-Coupled Device (such as a camera sensor) 
CFI 
Cool Flames Investigation (an MDCA experiment preceding ACME in the CIR) 
CFI-G 
Cool Flames Investigation with Gases (an ACME experiment) 
CH4 
methane 
CIA 
Chamber Insert Assembly (inserted into the CIR combustion chamber) 
CIR 
Combustion Integrated Rack (ISS facility in which ACME experiments are conducted) 
CLD Flame 
Coflow Laminar Diffusion Flame (an ACME experiments) 
CM 
Combustion Module (space shuttle precursor to the CIR) 
cm 
centimeter 
CO2 
carn dioxide 
Co-I 
Co-Investigator 
CRS 
Commercial Resupply Service (a designation of ISS cargo missions) 
CSA 
Canadian Space Agency 
CSV 
comma-separated values 
CWRU 
Case Western Reserve University 
Da 
Damköhler number 
DataCam 
Data Camera (ACME’s primary camera which was characterized for pyrometry, etc.) 
E-FIELD Flames Electric-Field Effects on Laminar Diffusion Flames (an ACME experiment) 
EMI 
electromagnetic interference 
EMS 
Experiment Mounting Structure 
ERD 
Engineering Requirements Document 
ESA 
European Space Agency 
Fiji 
Fiji Is Just ImageJ (a version of ImageJ preloaded with many plug-in features) 
Flame Design 
Flame Design (an ACME experiment) 
FOMA 
Fuel and Oxidizer Management Assembly (CIR’s gas management subsystem) 
FOV 
field of view 
fps 
frames per second 
GC 
Gas Chromatograph (see GCIP) 
GCIP 
Gas Chromatograph Instrumentation Package (for measuring CIR chamber contents) 
GigE 
Gigabit Ethernet (an interface standard for high performance cameras) 
GIPOC 
Glenn ISS Payload Operations Center (also known as the TSC) 
GMT 
Greenwich Mean Time (where most references in this report are the day) 
H2 
hydrogen 

=== PAGE 35 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
35 
 
HiBMs 
High Bit-depth Multi-spectral camera (developed for the CIR facility) 
HOBJ 
Halcon object (binary uncompressed format; used for the DataCam)  
HV 
high voltage 
HVPS 
High-Voltage Power Supply 
ICDERS 
International Colloquium on the Dynamics of Explosions and Reactive Systems  
ID 
inner diameter (e.g., of burner tube) 
ImageJ 
Image Processing and Analysis in Java (open-source image processing software)  
IPSU 
Image Processing and Storage Unit (CIR device for recording images on ISS) 
IPSU-G  
IPSU for GigE cameras (including the DataCam and CFI intensified camera) 
ISRD 
Integrated Science Requirements Document (for a set of experiments) 
ISS 
International Space Station 
JAXA 
Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency 
kPa 
kilopascal 
kV 
kilovolt 
LLL-UV 
Low Light Level Ultraviolet camera ((developed for the CIR facility) 
LSP 
Laminar Soot Processes (a shuttle study conducted in the Combustion Module) 
MDCA 
Multi-user Droplet Combustion Apparatus (a CIR chamber insert) 
MFC 
Mass Flow Controller 
Mist 
Water-Mist Fire Suppression Experiment (a Combustion Module experiment) 
MIUL 
Materials Identification/Usage List 
mm 
millimeter 
N2 
nitrogen 
NSF 
National Science Foundation 
NTSC 
National Television System Committee 
O2 
oxygen 
OMA2 
Optical Multi-channel Analyzer 2 (open-source software for image processing) 
ops 
operations 
PARIS 
Passive Rack Isolation System (with which the CIR is equipped, but not used for ACME) 
PI 
Principal Investigator 
PIMS 
Principal Investigator Microgravity Services 
PMT 
Photomultiplier Tube (where ACME is equipped with three PMT modules) 
PS 
Project Scientist 
PSI 
Physical Science Informatics System 
psia 
pounds per square inch 
PT 
pressure transducer 
QD 
quick disconnect 
qty 
quantity 
RSA 
Russian Space Agency, i.e., Roscosmos 
s 
second 
SAMS 
Space Acceleration Measurement System 
SDP 
Safety Data Package 
s-Flame 
Structure and Response of Spherical Diffusion Flames (an ACME experiment) 
SiC 
Silicon Carbide (material of the TFP fibers)  
slpm 
standard liters per minute (a measure of the mass or molar flow rate of a gas) 
SOFBALL  
Structure Of Flame Balls At Low Lewis-number (a Combustion Module study) 
SoFIE 
Solid Fuel Ignition and Extinction (project to follow ACME in the CIR facility) 
SORD 
Science Operations Requirements Document (an ACME supplement to the ISRD) 
SRD 
Science Requirements Document 

=== PAGE 36 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
36 
 
TDRS 
Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (System) 
TFP 
Thin Filament Pyrometry (a method for gas-phase temperature measurements) 
TIFF or TIF 
Tagged Image File Format (for the CFI intensified, HiBMs, and LLL-UV cameras) 
TM 
thermistor 
TS 
Transport Stream (a video format) 
TSC 
Telescience Support Center (also known as the GIPOC) 
UV 
ultraviolet 
Ze 
Zeldovich number 
zero-g 
zero gravity, i.e., microgravity 
ZIN 
ZIN Technologies, Inc. (ACME engineering and operations provider) 
µA 
microamp 
 
While this list of abbreviations and acronyms is long, it is not comprehensive.  Contact ACME Project 
Scientist Dennis Stocker (216-433-2166, dennis.p.stocker@nasa.gov) for additional clarification. 
 
 
 

=== PAGE 37 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
37 
 
Appendix B. 30-Day Operational Accomplishments Report for ISS 
Increments 59 and 60 
16 December 2019 
30-day Operational Accomplishments Report  
… for the International Space Station (ISS) Increments 59 and 60 
 
ACME 
Advanced Combustion via Microgravity Experiments 
s-Flame 
Structure and Response of Spherical Diffusion Flames 
The s-Flame investigation is one of several independent experiments that are part of the ACME 
project, which uses a single modular set of hardware to carry out studies of flames burning 
gaseous fuels in the ISS’ Combustion Integrated Rack (CIR).  The initial days of s-Flame testing 
with flames were carried out in the final month of Increment 60.  As a result, there is nothing to 
be reported for Increment 59. 
 
Prepared by the PI team and Dennis Stocker (dennis.p.stocker@nasa.gov), the ACME Project 
Scientist, who is the primary contact for s-Flame and ACME information. 
 
 
 
Principal Investigator (PI): 
Prof. C.K. (Ed) Law, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 
Co-Investigator (Co-I): 
Prof. Stephen D. Tse, Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ 
Lead collaborator: 
Dr. Vladimir V. Gubernov, P.N. Lebedev Physical Institute of the 
Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russia 
NASA Project Scientist (PS): Dennis P. Stocker, NASA Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, OH 
 
 
 
I.  Introduction 
Tests for the Structure and Response of Spherical Diffusion Flames (s-Flame) experiment were 
conducted in the Combustion Integrated Rack (CIR) on the International Space Station, as part of 
the Advanced Combustion via Microgravity Experiments (ACME) project.  The purpose of s-Flame 
is to advance the ability to predict the structure and dynamics, including extinction and 
instabilities, of both soot-free and sooty flames.  The results may contribute to the development 
of lean-burn engines for improved efficiency and reduced pollutant emissions here on Earth. 
 
The spherical flames are ignited at non-steady conditions and allowed to transition naturally 
toward extinction.  Tests are conducted with various inert diluents in both the fuel and chamber 
atmosphere.  The fuel gases include hydrogen and methane mixtures for soot-free flames, and 
ethylene for sooty flames.  One experiment objective is to identify the extinction limits for both 
radiative and chemical kinetic extinction, i.e., where the flame extinguishes from heat loss or is 
blown out, respectively.  Another objective is to determine the existence, onset, and nature of 

=== PAGE 38 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
38 
 
pulsating instabilities that have been theoretically predicted to occur in flames with certain 
fuel/inert mixtures.  
 
More specifically, s-Flame has the following experimental objectives: 
A. Measure and characterize the transient structure (such as temperature and species 
distribution) of diffusion flames established at initially non-steady, spherical flame 
structures for mixtures of different H2/CH4/diluent ratios (soot-free) and different 
C2H4/diluent ratios (sooty), for different flow rates.  
B. Determine the quasi-steady convective/chemical-kinetic extinction limits (low system 
Damköhler numbers) and radiative/chemical-kinetic extinction limits (high system 
Damköhler numbers) for mixtures of different H2/CH4/diluent ratios (soot-free) and 
different C2H4/diluent ratios (sooty). 
A. Determine the existence (for different Zeldovich number, Ze), onset (as a function Da), 
and nature (i.e. mode, frequency, amplitude) of pulsating instabilities theoretically 
predicted to occur in transient spherical diffusion flames using fuel/diluent mixtures that 
are above a critical Lewis number. 
 
As suggested by the experiment’s name, s-Flame features a spherically symmetric diffusion 
flame, which is generated by discharging a fuel gas from a porous spherical burner into a still 
oxygen/inert atmosphere in microgravity.  The one-dimensional nature of the system facilitates 
data acquisition, data reduction, and computational simulation. 
 
The space flight program consists of two main parts: (1) Mapping and characterization of the 
motion (e.g., expansion) of spherical diffusion flames subsequent to ignition and at extinction 
because of the finite-rate chemistry and radiative heat loss.  The study is focused on the thermal 
radiation, the adequacy of the detailed chemistry and transport submodels used in 
computational modeling, and the development of flame front instabilities that could modify the 
extinction boundaries.  (2) Studies of the response of characteristically sooty flames to ignition, 
the onset of soot in the expanding flames, the soot radiation, and the soot’s effects on the flame 
spread, extinction, and instability. 
 
Microgravity studies of flames allow for a range of simplifications and provide various advantages 
over normal-gravity studies.  For example, the natural flicker of flames, which is a buoyancy-
driven (i.e., gravity-driven) instability, is eliminated yielding quasi-steady flames in microgravity.  
Length scales are increased in microgravity flames facilitating analysis of the flame structure.  
Momentum-dominated flames, which are important for most practical combustion, can be 
studied at low velocities to simplify analysis.  Microgravity flames tend to have a much stronger 
sensitivity to their atmosphere and exhibit a much broader range of characteristics than normal-
gravity flames because of the near absence of buoyant entrainment.  The long residence times in 
microgravity flames can lead to strong soot production, but many microgravity flames are soot 
free.  The absence of buoyancy makes microgravity flames advantageous for studies of limit and 
stability behavior where chemical kinetics are important.  For example, chemi-ion species, 
electronically-excited chemiluminescent species, are at very low concentration in typical flames, 
making the reduced buoyancy environment valuable for evaluating the minor species chemistry.  

=== PAGE 39 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
39 
 
With these advantages, microgravity testing can lead to new understanding of the complex 
nature of combustion – regardless of the gravitational environment of the combustion 
application. 
 
II.  Methods/Research Operations 
  
A. Discussion of Method/Protocol 
The s-Flame investigation and other ACME experiments are configured, but not 
conducted, by the ISS crew.  The crew’s role is to set up the hardware, gas bottles, etc. 
for each set of tests.  The most common changes include the gas bottles on the 
Combustion Integrated Rack (CIR) and the mass flow controllers on the modular ACME 
chamber insert. 
 
All testing is commanded from the ground, specifically from the Glenn ISS Payload 
Operations Center (GIPOC).  The science portion of the testing is typically conducted in a 
nominally automated mode using pre-programmed scripts.  However, it may alternately 
be conducted in a ‘manual’ mode, where changes are made to a control parameter in 
response to the analog video downlink and the numerical data available in the telemetry 
stream.  But it is not expected that such control, which might be used to approach a 
stability or soot limit, will be used for s-Flame.  Thus far, that has been the case for this 
experiment, with the possible mundane exception of ‘manually’ halting the test after the 
flame has extinguished. 
 
Testing is not conducted when thrusters fire or spacecraft dock or undock from ISS to 
ensure an acceptable acceleration environment. 
 
Data is downlinked between each set of tests, i.e., day of testing, to allow for preliminary 
analysis and requisite planning for subsequent testing. 
  
 
III.  Results 
A. Baselined Activities Completed – Pre-flight, In-flight, Post-Flight 
A total of 29 flames were ignited for the s-Flame experiment in its two days of flame 
testing during Increment 60.  Note that the investigation’s science testing didn’t begin 
until September 2019, so no flames were ignited during Increment 59.  
 
The s-Flame experiment does not have living subjects like a life science experiment, but 
the tests are independently conducted with various gaseous fuels, including hydrogen, 
methane, hydrogen/methane blends, and ethylene.  These are simple hydrocarbon gases 
for which the chemistry is relatively well understood.  The Increment 60 tests were all 
conducted with ethylene (C2H4), which is typically highly sooting because of its carbon 
double bond, but where the fuel was diluted with nitrogen for these tests. 
 

=== PAGE 40 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
40 
 
No samples (e.g., of soot) were collected for s-Flame; all of the ISS results were 
electronically transmitted to the ground.  That is furthermore the case for all currently 
planned ACME experiments. 
 
A summary log of the flames ignited for s-Flame during Increment 60, including a limited 
overview of the test conditions, is found in Table 1. 
 
Table 1. 
s-Flame log of flames ignited in Increment 60  
(where the investigation did not begin until Increment 60) 
Test 
Day1 
Year Month Date Atmosphere2 
Chamber 
Pressure 
Fuel bottle 
Flames 
ignited2 
First round of tests, with nitrogen-diluted fuel, in Sept. 2019 (Increment 60) 
19254 2019 
9 
11 
~21% O2, 
with N2 
~1 atm 
50% C2H4 
with N2 
13 
19256 
13 
16 
1Test Day includes the year as the first two digits followed by the 3-digit day of the year. 
2Flames ignited is the number ignited on that day (neglecting the day change on ISS). 
 
Pre-flight and post-flight activities are generally not addressed in this report. 
 
B. List of Preflight, In-flight, Postflight Anomalies 
1. Mission anomalies  
When s-Flame’s first fuel bottle was installed on the CIR on July 30 (19211) it was at 
the expected pressure, but the fuel pressure was observed to drop with time, 
indicating a leak.  Troubleshooting, including testing with other fuel bottles, was 
carried out and it was concluded that the issue was related to the first s-Flame fuel 
bottle, which contained a hydrogen/methane blend.  It was concluded that the leak 
was related to the quick connection, where it might have been caused by foreign 
debris.  The bottle was returned to Earth and tested in the ground copy of the CIR, but 
surprisingly a leak was not found in that testing. 
 
During the review of the leaked fuel bottle, it was determined that the bottles with 
the hydrogen/methane blends (H2/CH4) were over-filled in that the flammable and 
explosive limits could be reached if the fuel were to leak into the open volume of the 
CIR rack.  A mistake had been made in the determination of the bottle pressure which 
would be safe in the event of a leak.  The two fuels were considered individually 
instead of collectively using Le Chatelier's mixing rule.  Therefore, before their use, 
the plan is to vent each H2/CH4 bottle to a pressure that will be safe if a bottle leaks 
into the CIR free volume. 
 
The CIR’s IPSU-G Image Processing and Storage Unit for Gigabit Ethernet cameras, 
which is used with the ACME Data Camera (DataCam) and Cool Flames Investigation 
(CFI) intensified camera, didn’t properly archive all of the image data on Sept. 13 

=== PAGE 41 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
41 
 
(19256).  A large fraction of the image data while the flame was burning was lost.  
Trouble shooting was subsequently conducted to hopefully resolve the issue before 
further flame testing was conducted.  Ultimately, the IPSU-G was removed and 
replaced by astronaut Jessica Meir on October 24 (19297) where subsequent check-
out on Oct. 28 (19301) confirmed normal archival of the image data.  Regular testing 
resumed on Oct. 31 (19304). 
 
2. Any other difficulties in obtaining scientific data   
During Increment 60, one s-Flame test automatically aborted (due to the controlling 
software script), where that was prior to gas flow and the activation of the igniter – 
which is typical for other ACME experiments.  As a result, there was little lost other 
than the time in the failed test attempt.   ACME aborts normally occur because of 
communication issues with an IPSU, although in this case it was because of operator 
error.  ACME aborts are infrequent, but there are sometimes days when they occur 
repeatedly.  
 
Tests are of course also unsuccessful when the flame fails to ignite.  Two tests on the 
first day of testing failed to ignite, where adjustments to the tests parameters 
associated with the relative timing of the fuel flow and igniter activation thereafter 
resulted in successful ignition, with the exception of the abort discussed above.  For 
other ACME tests, ignition has sometime been unsuccessful because the settings for 
the automatic flame detection are such that detection threshold is reached because 
of the igniter glow rather than a flame.  As a result of the detection, the hot-wire 
igniter is deactivated and retracted, which is of course an issue if the flame has yet to 
ignite.  This is typically avoided by detecting ignition with measurement of the flame’s 
OH* chemiluminescence with a Photomultiplier Tube (PMT) module.  The OH* 
chemiluminescence, in the ultraviolet at 310 nm, is a good indicator of an ignited 
flame rather than the glowing igniter, which emits primarily in the infrared and visible 
spectrum.  However, the combination of igniter settings and PMT gains can lead to 
false ignition detection. 
 
At high flow rates, the burner does not produce spherically symmetric flames.  While 
nominally spherical at moderate flow rates, the flame’s center becomes increasing 
offset from the burner center.  More specifically, the flame is shifted toward the 
supply tube indicating that the sintered attachment of the porous sphere to the 
supply tube is more ‘open’ than the pores of the spherical burner.  In other words, the 
flow from the burner is not spherically symmetric.  At sufficiently high flow rates, the 
flame becomes obviously non-spherical, where it can appear to be ellipsoidal or even 
parabolic in shape.  In the latter case, the flame locally quenches near the supply tube. 
 
Small flow perturbations have been noticed in some s-Flame tests, where ACME’s 
Mass Flow Controllers (MFCs) used to control the flow of fuel, nitrogen, and oxidizer 
have unfortunately not always performed satisfactorily.  The flow irregularities have 
been most apparent through their effect on the Photomultiplier Tube (PMT) 

=== PAGE 42 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
42 
 
measurements, e.g., of OH* and CH* chemiluminescence.  A momentary increase in 
fuel flow, as has occurred in some s-Flame tests, naturally leads to increased light from 
the flame. The MFCs are tested - without flames - after they are first installed.  
Adjustments are typically made to (1) the setting that controls when the valves open 
and (2) the Proportional-Integral-Derivative (PID) settings.  This ACME activity has 
involved significant testing, where there are an assortment of MFCs with different 
flow ranges for each of the three gas types.  While the MFC adjustments have been 
beneficial, they have not eliminated all gas flow problems.  It was seen in prior ACME 
testing that nitrogen oscillations (if any) tend to damp with time, so a nitrogen pre-
flow can be used so that such oscillations might end before the flame is ignited.  As 
another measure, the MFCs are re-zeroed prior to each test, where that was another 
measure adopted in earlier ACME testing. 
 
C. Completeness/Quality of Data 
As a result of the anomalies discussed in III.B.1, only two days of flame tests were 
conducted for the s-Flame investigation during Increment 60, whereas approximately 16 
days of such testing are planned.  However, 29 flames were successfully ignited which is 
significant in comparison to the 58 tests specified as required in the ACME Integrated 
Science Requirements Document (ISRD).  Therefore a wealth of data was obtained for a 
limited set of test conditions. 
 
However, a large fraction of the key image data from the tests conducted on Sept. 13 
(19256) was not archived (again as discussed in III.B.1).  As a result, that test day will be 
repeated. 
 
Data quality is of course dependent on the experimental hardware.  But neglecting that 
limitation on data quality, the cameras are sensitive to radiation where pixels gradually 
become ‘hot’ (i.e., dead) over time.  While these bright spots are addressed in image post-
processing, they are a degradation of the image quality. 
 
It is possible that the tests are subtly affected by the acceleration environment, but there 
is not obvious indication of this and it has thus far not been evaluated with available 
measurements from the Space Acceleration Measurement System (SAMS).  In this regard, 
note that the Combustion Integrated Rack (CIR), in which the experiment is conducted, is 
equipped with a Passive Rack Isolation System (PaRIS).  
 
D. Status of Data Analysis 
Image files are currently being processed.  Radial position of maximum CH* 
chemilumenscence is being plotted against time.  Different radii are being considered and 
plotted together, as some flames are not completely symmetric.  MFC and PMT data are 

=== PAGE 43 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
43 
 
being compared with video images to assess and confirm experimental settings.  
Radiometer data is being reviewed.  Analysis of the fiber pyrometry data has not begun. 
 
Computational simulations with detailed chemistry and transport of the test cases are 
underway.  Time dependent simulations will be compared with the time-dependent 
experimental data.  Steady-state simulations will produce the Isola curves mapping flame 
response versus system Damkhöler number for given fuel mixtures.  The experimental 
cases will then be pin-pointed on the computational mappings to assess whether the 
experimental conditions were in quasi-steady state or near extinction limits, either kinetic 
or radiative.  Oscillation behavior will be correlated to possible pulsating oscillations 
found in the simulations. 
 
E. Preliminary Research Findings 
The s-Flame experiment utilizes spherically-symmetric diffusion flames and their 
dynamics and responses to investigate fundamental processes, such as extinction, 
instability, and soot formation.  ISS testing for 19254 and 19256 examined nitrogen-
diluted ethylene flames in air. 
 
The experiments of 19254 revealed that a quasi-steady flame could be attained for 
extended duration at low flow rate, i.e., 3cc/s for 20% C2H4 / 80% N2.  The flame was shut 
down by the automated system because the burner reached a cut-off temperature of 
250°C.  Although the flame oscillated near the end of the experiment, it was likely due to 
influence of the burner tube.  Comparisons with computation simulations will help to 
clarify the involved processes.  For higher flow rates, e.g., 5-10cc/s, with the same 
mixture, radiative extinctions were observed.  Generally, the flames showed unstable 
behavior near the burner tube prior to extinction, likely because of lack of fuel mixture 
and heat loss in that region.  Other mixtures, e.g., 25% C2H4 / 75% N2 and 30% C2H4 / 70% 
N2, also showed radiative extinctions at higher flow rates.  For some cases, the pyrometry 
fiber interacted with the flame, allowing extraction of temperature in on-going analyses.  
Soot was observed only during ignition, which went away as the flame established itself.  
To asses whether these nitrogen-diluted ethylene flames are non-sooty or sooty, cases 
were run where mixtures were ignited and established at low flow rates (e.g., 3 cc/s) with 
low ethylene contents (e.g., 25-30% C2H4) and then ramped to high flow rates (e.g., 5-10 
cc/s) with higher ethylene contents (e.g., 40-50% C2H4).  The flames all radiatively 
extinguished, but no sooting was observed.  Observations of such radiative extinction 
behavior at high flow rates is an achievement because such phenomenon was not 
observed in our ground-based experiments, given the limited microgravity durations.  
Radiative reabsorption extends flame size at extinction.  In ISS testing, radiative extinction 
has been found to be a common event, which was predicted computationally, but not 
observed previously for our flame conditions. 
 
The experiments of 19256 were aimed at examining kinetic extinction.  Similar to the 
radiative extinction cases, sufficient microgravity duration is needed to observe kinetic 
extinction because a near steady flame needs to be established first, before ramp down 

=== PAGE 44 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
44 
 
in flow rate to find properly the chemical kinetic extinction limit.  High flow rate cases 
(e.g., 13.5 cc/s, 15 cc/s) showed asymmetrical flames which radiatively extinguished.  
Flow rates were lowered so that quasi-steady flames could be established before ramp 
down in flow rate.  The 15% C2H4 mixtures were not strong enough to sustain a quasi-
steady flame at 3 cc/s before ramp down.  However, for stronger mixtures, i.e., 20-30% 
C2H4, very nice flames were established at 3 cc/s; and kinetic extinctions were observed 
during ramp down before reaching 1 cc/s.  Radiative extinctions for ramp up cases were 
also examined.  Similarly, for stronger mixtures, i.e., 20-30% C2H4, very nice flames were 
established at 3 cc/s; and radiative extinctions were observed during ramp up before 
reaching 8 cc/s. 
 
Future tests will investigate soot formation processes, which have not been observed for 
the fuel mixtures and conditions tested thus far. 
 
Early ISS results were presented in the following presentations: 
1. Chung K. Law and Stephen Tse, “ACME - s-Flame,” ISS Increments 61 & 62 Science 
Symposium, 17-19 Sept. 2019.  (oral presentation) 
2. Stephen D. Tse, Jonathan Shi, Delin Zhu, and Chung K. Law, “Dynamics of Burner-
Generated Spherical Diffusion Flames In Microgravity,” 35th Annual Meeting of 
the American Society for Gravitational and Space Research, Denver, CO, 20-23 
Nov. 2019. (poster presentation) 
  
F. Communication Imagery 
1. Still Imagery 
Photos are available online at www.flickr.com/photos/space-flames.  Although the 
Facebook page at www.facebook.com/space.flames is meant to provide updates on 
ACME and related combustion research, it is good source for recent photos, e.g., of 
flames, that may not be available on the Flickr site.  Additional photographs may be 
requested from the Project Scientist, Dennis Stocker (dennis.p.stocker@nasa.gov).  
 
2. Video 
‘The Power of Studying Combustion on the ISS,’ which was developed with input from 
the ACME Project Scientist, is available at https://science.nasa.gov/science-
news/news-articles/the-power-of-studying-combustion-on-the-iss. 
 
Video(s) describing the ACME project can be found at  
https://www1.grc.nasa.gov/space/iss-research/iss-fcf/cir/acme/. 
 
Videos related to s-Flame and other microgravity combustion research can also be 
seen on Facebook at www.facebook.com/space.flames. 
  
Contact Dennis Stocker (dennis.p.stocker@nasa.gov) for access to those videos or for 
additional videos. 
 

=== PAGE 45 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
45 
 
IV. Additional Comments from science team 
None. 
 
 
 
 

=== PAGE 46 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
46 
 
Appendix C. 30-Day Operational Accomplishments Report for ISS 
Increments 61 and 62 
11 June 2020 
30-day Operational Accomplishments Report  
… for the International Space Station (ISS) Increments 61 and 62 
 
ACME 
Advanced Combustion via Microgravity Experiments 
s-Flame 
Structure and Response of Spherical Diffusion Flames 
The s-Flame investigation is one of several independent experiments that are part of the ACME 
project, which uses a single modular set of hardware to carry out studies of flames burning 
gaseous fuels in the ISS’ Combustion Integrated Rack (CIR).  The s-Flame testing began at the end 
of Increment 60 and continued through Increment 61, where progress was limited by both 
technical issues and limited crew availability.  Because of the latter, no tests were conducted 
during Increment 62. 
 
Prepared by the PI team and Dennis Stocker (dennis.p.stocker@nasa.gov), the ACME Project 
Scientist, who is the primary contact for s-Flame and ACME information. 
 
 
 
Principal Investigator (PI): 
Prof. C.K. (Ed) Law, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 
Co-Investigator (Co-I): 
Prof. Stephen D. Tse, Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ 
Lead collaborator: 
Dr. Vladimir V. Gubernov, P.N. Lebedev Physical Institute of the 
Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russia 
NASA Project Scientist (PS): Dennis P. Stocker, NASA Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, OH 
 
 
 
I.  Introduction 
Tests for the Structure and Response of Spherical Diffusion Flames (s-Flame) experiment were 
conducted in the Combustion Integrated Rack (CIR) on the International Space Station, as part of 
the Advanced Combustion via Microgravity Experiments (ACME) project.  The purpose of s-Flame 
is to advance the ability to predict the structure and dynamics, including extinction and 
instabilities, of both soot-free and sooty flames.  The results may contribute to the development 
of lean-burn engines for improved efficiency and reduced pollutant emissions here on Earth. 
 
The spherical flames are ignited at non-steady conditions and allowed to transition naturally 
towards steady-state or extinction.  Tests are conducted with various inert diluents in both the 
fuel and chamber (oxidizer) atmosphere.  The fuel gases include hydrogen and methane mixtures 
for soot-free flames, and ethylene for sooty flames.  One experimental objective is to identify the 
extinction limits for both radiative and chemical kinetic extinction, i.e., where the flame 

=== PAGE 47 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
47 
 
extinguishes from radiative heat loss or is “blown out,” respectively.  Another objective is to 
determine the existence, onset, and nature of pulsating instabilities that have been theoretically 
predicted to occur in flames with certain fuel/inert mixtures at near-limit conditions.  
 
More specifically, s-Flame has the following experimental objectives: 
A. Measure and characterize the transient structure (such as temperature and species 
distribution) of diffusion flames established at initially non-steady, spherical flame 
structures for mixtures of different H2/CH4/diluent ratios (soot-free) and different 
C2H4/diluent ratios (sooty), for different flow rates.  
B. Determine the quasi-steady convective/chemical-kinetic extinction limits (low system 
Damköhler numbers) and radiative/chemical-kinetic extinction limits (high system 
Damköhler numbers) for mixtures of different H2/CH4/diluent ratios (soot-free) and 
different C2H4/diluent ratios (sooty). 
B. Determine the existence (for different Zeldovich number, Ze), onset (as a function Da), 
and nature (i.e. mode, frequency, amplitude) of pulsating instabilities theoretically 
predicted to occur in transient spherical diffusion flames using fuel/diluent mixtures that 
are above a critical Lewis number, at near-limit conditions. 
 
As suggested by the experiment’s name, s-Flame features a spherically symmetric diffusion 
flame, which is generated by discharging a fuel gas from a porous spherical burner into a still 
oxygen/inert atmosphere in microgravity.  The one-dimensional nature of the system facilitates 
data acquisition, data reduction, and computational simulation. 
 
The space flight program consists of two main parts: (1) Mapping and characterization of the 
motion (e.g., expansion) of spherical diffusion flames subsequent to ignition and at extinction 
because of the finite-rate chemistry and radiative heat loss.  The study is focused on the thermal 
radiation, the adequacy of the detailed chemistry and transport submodels used in 
computational modeling, and the development of flame front instabilities that could modify the 
extinction boundaries.  (2) Studies of the response of characteristically sooty flames to ignition, 
the onset of soot in the expanding flames, the soot radiation, and the soot’s effects on the flame 
spread, extinction, and instability. 
 
Microgravity studies of flames allow for a range of simplifications and provide various advantages 
over normal-gravity studies.  For example, the natural flicker of flames, which is a buoyancy-
driven (i.e., gravity-driven) instability, is eliminated yielding quasi-steady flames in microgravity.  
Characteristic length scales are increased in microgravity flames facilitating analysis of the flame 
structure.  Momentum-dominated flames, which are important for most practical combustion 
systems, can be studied at low velocities to simplify analysis.  Microgravity flames tend to have a 
much stronger sensitivity to their atmosphere and exhibit a much broader range of 
characteristics than normal-gravity flames because of the near absence of buoyant entrainment.  
The long residence times in microgravity flames can lead to strong soot production, but many 
microgravity flames are soot free.  The absence of buoyancy makes microgravity flames 
advantageous for studies of limit and stability behavior where chemical kinetics are important.  
For example, chemi-ion species, electronically-excited chemiluminescent species, are at very low 

=== PAGE 48 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
48 
 
concentration in typical flames, making the reduced buoyancy environment valuable for 
evaluating the minor species chemistry.  With these advantages, microgravity testing can lead to 
new understanding of the complex nature of combustion – regardless of the gravitational 
environment of the combustion application. 
 
 
II.  Methods/Research Operations  
 
A. Discussion of Method/Protocol 
The s-Flame investigation and other ACME experiments are configured, but not 
conducted, by the ISS crew.  The crew’s role is to set up the hardware, gas bottles, etc. 
for each set of tests.  The most common changes include the gas bottles on the 
Combustion Integrated Rack (CIR) and the mass flow controllers on the modular ACME 
chamber insert. 
 
All testing is commanded from the ground, specifically from the Glenn ISS Payload 
Operations Center (GIPOC).  The science portion of the testing is typically conducted in a 
nominally automated mode using pre-programmed scripts.  However, it may alternately 
be conducted in a ‘manual’ mode, where changes are made to a control parameter in 
response to the analog video downlink and the numerical data available in the telemetry 
stream.  But it is not expected that such control, which might be used to approach a 
stability or soot limit, will be used for s-Flame.  Thus far, that has been the case for this 
experiment, with the possible mundane exception of ‘manually’ halting the test after the 
flame has extinguished. 
 
Testing is not conducted when thrusters fire or spacecraft dock or undock from ISS to 
ensure an acceptable acceleration environment. 
 
Data is downlinked between each set of tests, i.e., day of testing, to allow for preliminary 
analysis and requisite planning for subsequent testing. 
  
 
III.  Results 
A. Baselined Activities Completed – Pre-flight, In-flight, Post-Flight 
Thus far, a total of 145 flames were ignited for the s-Flame experiment, with 29 and 116 
respectively ignited during Increment 60 and 61.  In this regard, science testing began at 
the end of Increment 60 and the first round of tests were completed during Increment 
61.  No tests were conducted in Increment 62 due to a lack of crew time. 
 
The s-Flame experiment does not have living subjects like a life science experiment, but 
the tests are independently conducted with various gaseous fuels, including hydrogen, 
methane, hydrogen/methane blends, and ethylene.  These are simple hydrocarbon gases 
for which the chemistry is relatively well understood.  The Increment 60 tests were all 

=== PAGE 49 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
49 
 
conducted with ethylene (C2H4), which is typically highly sooting because of its carbon 
double bond (under normal gravity conditions), but where the fuel was diluted with 
nitrogen for these tests. 
 
No samples (e.g., of soot) were collected for s-Flame; all of the ISS results were 
electronically transmitted to the ground.  That is furthermore the case for all currently 
planned ACME experiments. 
 
A summary log of the flames ignited for s-Flame thus far, including a limited overview of 
the test conditions, is found in Table 1.  The first two test days occurred at the end of 
Increment 60. 
 
Table 1. 
s-Flame log of flames ignited thus far, i.e., in Increments 60-62  
Test 
Day1 
Year Month Date Atmosphere2 
Chamber 
Pressure 
Fuel bottle 
Flames 
ignited2 
First round of tests, with nitrogen-diluted fuel (in Increments 60-61) 
19254 
2019 
9 
11 
~21% O2, 
with N2 
~1 atm 
50% C2H4 
with N2 
13 
19256 
13 
16 
19304 
10 
31 
45% CH4 
with N2 
9 
19308 
11 
4 
~30% O2, 
with N2 
21 
19352 
12 
18 
~21% O2, 
with N2 
100% H2 
10 
20006 
2020 
1 
6 
44.4% H2 
with CH4 
17 
20013 
13 
66.7% H2 
with CH4 
22 
20024 
24 
100% H2 
16 
20029 
29 
50% C2H4 
with N2 
21 
1Test Day includes the year as the first two digits followed by the 3-digit day of the year. 
2Flames ignited is the number ignited on that day (neglecting the day change on ISS). 
 
Pre-flight and post-flight activities are generally not addressed in this report. 
 
B. List of Preflight, In-flight, Postflight Anomalies 
1. Mission anomalies  
The only significant anomaly to occur during this increment pair was the mis-
formatting of image data from ACME’s primary camera on Dec. 18 (19352).  The cause 
is unknown, but there were repeated operational issues with the CIR’s Image 
Processing and Storage Units (IPSUs) on that test day.  Fortunately, the mis-formatting 
was not seen on subsequent test days and the problematic test day was nominally 
repeated on Jan. 24 (20024). 

=== PAGE 50 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
50 
 
 
However, work was carried out during Increment 61 to address an anomaly that 
occurred near the end of Increment 60.  During testing on Sept. 13 (19256), the CIR’s 
IPSU-G Image Processing and Storage Unit for Gigabit Ethernet cameras, which is used 
with the ACME Data Camera (DataCam) and Cool Flames Investigation (CFI) intensified 
camera, didn’t properly archive all of the image data on Sept. 13 (19256).  A large 
fraction of the image data was lost.  The issue wasn’t resolved by remote trouble 
shooting and the IPSU-G was ultimately removed and replaced by astronaut Jessica 
Meir on October 24 (19297).  Subsequent check-out on Oct. 28 (19301) confirmed 
normal archival of the image data, where regular testing resumed on Oct. 31 (19304). 
 
2. Any other difficulties in obtaining scientific data   
Neglecting the anomalies, the most noteworthy challenge was in imaging the 
hydrogen and hydrogen-diluted flames, which were not apparent or hardly visible to 
the operations camera and ACME DataCam, where the latter is the primary camera 
for ACME testing.  The testing with the extremely dim flames was limited to that 
conducted on Dec. 18 (19352) and Jan. 24 (20024), where the testing on the latter day 
was to make up for the earlier image mis-formatting discussed in the preceding 
section.  This situation unfortunately inhibits assessment of the three-dimensional 
flame symmetry as the two intensified cameras are opposite of each other. 
 
During Increment 61, several s-Flame tests automatically aborted (due to the 
controlling software script), where that was prior to gas flow and the activation of the 
igniter – which is typical for other ACME experiments.  As a result, there was little lost 
other than the time in the failed test attempt.   ACME aborts normally occur because 
of communication issues with an IPSU, and that happened for tests 19304A5, 
19352D3, 19352P1, 20024N1, and 20024J1.   A few other tests aborted because flow 
rates were accidentally specified outside of the range of the installed mass flow 
controller(s), where that included 19352A1, 19352D2, and 20013C2.  ACME aborts are 
infrequent, but there are sometimes days when they occur repeatedly as can be seen 
here.  
 
Tests are also unsuccessful when the flame fails to ignite, where that occurred during 
Increment 61 in tests 19304A4, 19304A6, 19308C1, and 20006A1.  That can be 
corrected by adjusting various test parameters and other settings.  In this case, 
adjustments were subsequently made to the ignition position (e.g., after 19304A4 and 
19304A6), the relative timing of the fuel flow and igniter activation (e.g., after 
19308C1), and the duration of the igniter activation (e.g., after 20006A1).  As another 
example, failed ignition can result from false ignition detection and deactivation 
resulting from the combination of settings for ignition and detection, e.g., the gain for 
the Photomultiplier Tube (PMT) module measuring the OH* chemiluminescence.  The 
latter, in the ultraviolet at 310 nm, is a good indicator of an ignited flame rather than 
the glowing igniter, which emits primarily in the infrared and visible spectrum. 
 

=== PAGE 51 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
51 
 
At high flow rates, the burner does not produce spherically symmetric flames.  While 
nominally spherical at moderate flow rates, the flame’s center becomes increasing 
offset from the burner center.  More specifically, the flame is shifted toward the 
supply tube indicating that the sintered attachment of the porous sphere to the 
supply tube is more ‘open’ than the pores of the spherical burner.  In other words, the 
flow from the burner is not spherically symmetric.  At sufficiently high flow rates, the 
flame becomes obviously non-spherical, where it can appear to be ellipsoidal or even 
parabolic in shape.  In the latter case, the flame locally quenches near the supply tube. 
 
When at a small fraction of the maximum flow rate, Mass Flow Controller (MFC) 
performance has been seen to be poor during s-Flame testing, i.e., where actual flow 
rate differed from that desired.  However, this was not a surprise to those familiar 
with the hardware. 
 
Flow perturbations have been noticed in some s-Flame tests, where ACME’s MFCs 
used to control the flow of fuel, nitrogen, and oxidizer have unfortunately not always 
performed satisfactorily.  In tests conducted using the 1-slpm fuel MFC (where the 
flow range is on a nitrogen basis), the flow has been seen to overshoot and 
undershoot when first opening.  Small flow irregularities have been most apparent 
through their effect on the Photomultiplier Tube (PMT) measurements, e.g., of OH* 
and CH* chemiluminescence.  A momentary increase in fuel flow, as has occurred in 
some s-Flame tests, naturally leads to increased light from the flame. The MFCs are 
tested - without flames - after they are first installed.  Adjustments are typically made 
to (1) the setting that controls when the valves open and (2) the Proportional-Integral-
Derivative (PID) settings.  This ACME activity has involved significant testing, where 
there are an assortment of MFCs with different flow ranges for each of the three gas 
types.  While the MFC adjustments have been beneficial, they have not eliminated all 
gas flow problems.  It was seen in prior ACME testing that nitrogen oscillations (if any) 
tend to damp with time, so a nitrogen pre-flow can be used so that such oscillations 
might end before the flame is ignited.  As another measure, the MFCs are re-zeroed 
prior to each test, where that was another measure adopted in earlier ACME testing. 
 
C. Completeness/Quality of Data 
During Increments 60 and 61, nine days of tests were conducted during which 145 flames 
were ignited for the first round of testing.  In contrast, only 29 tests were specified as 
required or highly desired in the ACME Integrated Science Requirements Document 
(ISRD) for that round.  Therefore, a wealth of data was obtained for this round of testing 
which featured gaseous fuels diluted by nitrogen. 
 
However, there was a significant loss of data.  Most importantly, the first fuel bottle 
appeared to leak on installation (in Increment 60) and later on-orbit testing (in Increment 
61) with other hydrogen/methane blends suggests that its fuel mixture would have been 
ideal for achieving science success.  Furthermore, there was significant image data loss 
on two different test days, specifically Sept. 13 (19256) and Dec. 18 (19352).  As a result, 

=== PAGE 52 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
52 
 
those test days were nominally repeated on Jan. 29 (20029) and Jan. 24 (20024), 
respectively (i.e., in a reversed order).  For these reasons, a simple comparison of the total 
number of flames ignited (145) with that specified as required or highly desired (29) for 
the first round of testing is somewhat misleading. 
 
As discussed in the preceding section, the hydrogen and diluted-hydrogen flames were 
not apparent or extremely dim in imaging from the operations camera and ACME 
DataCam.  Neglecting that factor, the cameras are sensitive to radiation where pixels 
gradually become ‘hot’ (i.e., dead) over time.  While these bright spots are addressed in 
image post-processing, they are a degradation of the image quality. 
 
It is possible that the tests are subtly affected by the acceleration environment, but there 
is not obvious indication of this; and it has thus far not been evaluated with available 
measurements from the Space Acceleration Measurement System (SAMS).  
 
D. Status of Data Analysis [provided by Prof. Stephen Tse, Rutgers U.] 
Image files are currently being processed.  Radial positions of maximum CH* 
chemiluminescence is being plotted against time.  Different radii are being considered 
and plotted together, as some flames are not completely symmetric.  MFC and PMT data 
are being compared with video images to assess and confirm experimental settings.  
Radiometer data is being reviewed.  Analyses of the fiber pyrometry data has not begun. 
 
Computational simulations with detailed chemistry and transport of the test cases are 
underway.  Time-dependent simulations will be compared with the time-dependent 
experimental data.  Steady-state simulations will produce the Isola curves mapping flame 
response versus system Damkhöler number for given fuel mixtures.  The experimental 
cases will then be pin-pointed on the computational mappings to assess whether the 
experimental conditions are in quasi-steady state or near extinction limits, either kinetic 
or radiative.  Oscillation behavior will be correlated to possible pulsating oscillations 
found in the simulations. 
 
E. Preliminary Research Findings [provided by Prof. Tse and lightly edited by Stocker] 
The s-Flame experiment utilizes spherically-symmetric diffusion flames and their 
dynamics and responses to investigate fundamental processes, such as extinction, 
instability, and soot formation. 
 
The tests conducted on 19254 (near the end of Increment 60) revealed that a quasi-steady 
flame could be attained for extended duration at low flow rate, i.e., 3 cc/s for 20% 
C2H4/80% N2 (on a volume basis).  The flame was shut down by the automated system 
because the burner reached a cut-off temperature of 250°C.  Although the flame 
oscillated near the end of the test, it was likely due to influence of the burner tube.  
Comparisons with computation simulations will help to clarify the involved processes.  For 
higher flow rates, e.g., 5-10 cc/s, with the same mixture, radiative extinctions were 

=== PAGE 53 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
53 
 
observed.  Generally, the flames showed unstable behavior near the burner tube prior to 
extinction, likely because of lack of fuel mixture and heat loss in that region.  Other 
mixtures, e.g., 25% C2H4/75% N2 and 30% C2H4/70% N2, also showed radiative extinctions 
at higher flow rates.  For some cases, the pyrometry fiber interacted with the flame, 
allowing determination of temperature in on-going analyses.  Soot was observed only 
during ignition, which went away as the flame established itself.  To assess whether these 
nitrogen-diluted ethylene flames are non-sooty or sooty, cases were run where mixtures 
were ignited and established at low flow rates (e.g., 3 cc/s) with low ethylene contents 
(e.g., 25-30% C2H4) and then ramped to high flow rates (e.g., 5-10 cc/s) with higher 
ethylene contents (e.g., 40-50% C2H4).  The flames all radiatively extinguished, but no 
sooting was observed.  Observations of such radiative extinction behavior at high flow 
rates is an achievement because such phenomenon was not observed in our ground-
based studies, given the limited microgravity durations.  Radiative reabsorption extends 
flame size at extinction.  In ISS testing, radiative extinction has been found to be a 
common event, which was predicted computationally, but not observed previously for 
our flame conditions. 
 
The 19256 tests (in Increment 60) were aimed at examining kinetic extinction.  Similar to 
the radiative extinction cases, sufficient microgravity duration is needed to observe 
kinetic extinction because a near steady flame needs to be established first, before ramp 
down in flow rate to find properly the chemical kinetic extinction limit.  High flow rate 
cases (e.g., 13.5 cc/s, 15 cc/s) showed asymmetrical flames which radiatively 
extinguished.  Flow rates were lowered so that quasi-steady flames could be established 
before ramp down in flow rate.  The 15% C2H4 mixtures were not strong enough to sustain 
a quasi-steady flame at 3 cc/s before ramp down.  However, for stronger mixtures, i.e., 
20-30% C2H4, very nice flames were established at 3 cc/s; and kinetic extinctions were 
observed during ramp down before reaching 1 cc/s.  Radiative extinctions for ramp up 
cases were also examined.  Similarly, for stronger mixtures, i.e., 20-30% C2H4, very nice 
flames were established at 3 cc/s; and radiative extinctions were observed during ramp 
up before reaching 8 cc/s. 
 
Testing on 19304 investigated 45% CH4/55% N2 mixtures issuing into an air atmosphere.  
The results indicated that the flow rates specified by the fuel MFC (0.5 slpm) were in the 
regime of kinetic extinction.  Quasi-steady flames could not be established.  Furthermore, 
larger flow rates could not be provided by the MFC, so observations of radiative extinction 
could not be achieved.  Even with a larger capacity MFC, characteristically larger flames 
would be expected to be asymmetric.  As such, nitrogen-diluted methane flames were 
planned to be reexamined in increased oxygen atmosphere, i.e., 30% O2/70% N2. 
 
Consequently, the 19308 tests investigated nitrogen-diluted methane flames in 30% 
O2/70% N2 atmosphere.  Various methane concentrations from 45% down to 15% were 
examined.  For 45% CH4/55% N2, relatively long duration flames of ~15 s and ~10 s were 
established at flow rates of 2 cc/s and 3 cc/s, respectively.  At larger flow rates of 5 and 
9.4 cc/s, the flames expanded to large radii and then extinguished.  These flames 

=== PAGE 54 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
54 
 
appeared to demonstrate radiative extinction.  Reduction of flow rate from 2 cc/s to 1 
cc/s resulted in extinction during ramp down, indicating kinetic extinction.  For 30% 
CH4/70% N2, flow rates of 3, 5, and 10 cc/s produced flames that expanded to extinction 
(assumed radiatively); while reduction of flow rate from 3 to 1 cc/s resulted in presumably 
kinetic extinction during ramp down.  For 25% CH4/75% N2, flow rates of 5 and 10 cc/s 
yielded flames that expanded to extinction.  For 20% CH4/80% N2, constant flow rate of 
10 cc/s created a flame that expanded until extinction (assumed radiatively); while 
reduction of flow rate from 10 cc/s to 1 cc/s resulted in wavering extinction during ramp 
down, suggesting kinetic extinction.  For 15% CH4/85% N2, flames were ignited, but 
extinguished very quickly.  These tests of 19308 suggest that they could manifest both 
radiative and kinetic extinction for the conditions specified. 
 
The 19352 tests examined various concentrations of H2 (45%-70%) diluted with N2 issuing 
into air.  The installed fuel MFC had a maximum output of 0.1 slpm, which unfortunately 
provided a less-than-sufficient flow range where its use may have precluded the study of 
radiative extinction corresponding to larger flame sizes.  Imaging the diluted hydrogen 
flames was a challenge, especially since the hobj image files from the ACME DataCam 
were mis-formatted.  Furthermore, little could be seen in the analog ops imaging, e.g., 
where it, like the DataCam and Cool Flames Investigation (CFI) intensified camera, cannot 
image the ultraviolet OH* flame emission (at 310 nm).  Analysis of images from the Low 
Light Level Ultraviolet (LLL-UV) camera and its OH* filter is ongoing.  And as one might 
expect, little could be seen with the CFI intensified camera using its broadband CH2O filter.  
Quasi-steady flames seem to be present at low flow rates (e.g., 2.4 cc/s for 70% H2), as 
inferred from PMT, pyrometry fiber emission, and burner temperature observations.  
Kinetic extinction seems to occur as the flow rate is ramped down.  There were various 
problems with the IPSU and some tests aborted.  Using the 100% H2 bottle with a higher 
flow rate MFC was later performed for tests of 20024 (see below), which was a make-up 
test day added because of the mis-formatting of the DataCam image files. 
 
The tests conducted 20006, using the 44.4% H2/55.6% CH4 bottle, examined 20% H2/25% 
CH4/55% N2 mixtures issuing into air.  Flames extinguished, some with wavy oscillating 
behavior prior to extinction.  However, it seems that even for very small flow rates, e.g., 
2 cc/s, extinction was by the radiative mechanism during flame expansion.  There was too 
little parameter room in terms of flow rate and burner size to identify conclusively kinetic 
extinction during ramp down for these mixtures.  In short, radiative extinction (with local 
flame extinction and re-ignition seemed to occur prior to ultimate extinguishment) during 
flame expansion after ignition was observed.  However, it is unclear whether ramping 
down the flow rate resulted in kinetic extinction.  Detailed analyses of the data are 
needed.  The various cameras seemed to capture the tests well. 
 
The 20013 tests, which used the 66.7% H2/33.3% CH4 bottle, mainly investigated 30% 
H2/15% CH4/55% N2 mixtures issuing into air.  Radiative extinction was difficult to identify 
conclusively because flames with larger flow rates, e.g. 15 cc/s, seemed to last, although 
with patchy extinction areas, until time out.  Larger flow rates could not be examined 

=== PAGE 55 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
55 
 
either because of limited MFC range or distorted flame shape cause by burner limitations 
at high flow rates.  Also, kinetic extinction during ramp down could not be identified 
conclusively, as some flames seemed to extinguish because they were "going into the 
burner." 
 
The 20024 tests using the 100% H2 bottle repeated and augmented conditions for those 
of 19352 where the 0.1-slpm fuel MFC range was too low to examine radiative extinction 
and the analog and intensified cameras did not pick up the flame images at all or well.  
Here, the 0.5-slpm fuel MFC was used and only a fused silica filter was used for the Cool 
Flames Investigation (CFI) intensified camera.  45%-15% H2/N2 balance mixtures were 
investigated.  The flames at high flow rates, e.g., 10 cc/s, did not extinguish, appearing 
quasi-steady until time out.  The pyrometry fibers glowed, perhaps making good flame-
structure measurements, which will be evaluated subsequently.  The flames seemed to 
extinguish during ramp down, but further analysis is needed to assess kinetic extinction. 
 
The tests conducted on 20029 used 50% C2H4/50% N2 and repeated and augmented 
conditions of 19256, when the images were not good.  Again, the results indicated both 
kinetic and radiative extinction phenomena under corresponding conditions.  However, 
no sooting flames were established, necessitating 100% C2H4 and an enriched oxygen 
atmosphere to facilitate sooting behavior in possible future tests. 
 
In summary, selected preliminary findings from this testing include: 
o Cases run for nitrogen-diluted methane and ethylene flames and in air seemed to 
indicate kinetic extinction at low flow rates and radiative extinction at high flow 
rates.  As previously mentioned above (and in our report for the preceding 
increment pair), such phenomena were not observed in our ground-based 
research, given the limited microgravity durations.  Nevertheless, comparisons 
with computational simulations are needed to assess better the extinction 
behavior. 
o Cases run for nitrogen-diluted hydrogen flames seemed to show kinetic extinction 
at ramp down.  However, for the mass flow rates that could be accommodated, 
radiative extinction was not observed.   
o Cases run for nitrogen-diluted hydrogen/methane mixture flames manifested 
extinction, which are presumed to be radiative.  However, kinetic extinction at low 
flow rates could not be identified.  More analyses of the data are needed. 
 
Early ISS results were presented in the following presentations: 
1. Chung K. Law and Stephen Tse, “ACME - s-Flame,” ISS Increments 61 & 62 Science 
Symposium, 17-19 Sept. 2019.  (oral presentation) 
2. Stephen D. Tse, Jonathan Shi, Delin Zhu, and Chung K. Law, “Dynamics of Burner-
Generated Spherical Diffusion Flames In Microgravity,” 35th Annual Meeting of 
the American Society for Gravitational and Space Research, Denver, CO, 20-23 
Nov. 2019. (poster presentation) 
  

=== PAGE 56 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
56 
 
F. Communication Imagery 
1. Still Imagery 
Photos are available online at www.flickr.com/photos/space-flames.  Although the 
Facebook page at www.facebook.com/space.flames is meant to provide updates on 
ACME and related combustion research, it is good source for recent photos, e.g., of 
flames, that may not be available on the Flickr site.  Additional photographs may be 
requested from the Project Scientist, Dennis Stocker (dennis.p.stocker@nasa.gov).  
 
2. Video 
‘The Power of Studying Combustion on the ISS,’ which was developed with input from 
the ACME Project Scientist, is available at https://science.nasa.gov/science-
news/news-articles/the-power-of-studying-combustion-on-the-iss. 
 
Video(s) describing the ACME project can be found at  
https://www1.grc.nasa.gov/space/iss-research/iss-fcf/cir/acme/. 
 
Videos related to s-Flame and other microgravity combustion research can also be 
seen on Facebook at www.facebook.com/space.flames. 
  
Contact Dennis Stocker (dennis.p.stocker@nasa.gov) for access to those videos or for 
additional videos. 
 
 
IV. Additional Comments from science team 
None. 
 
 

=== PAGE 57 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
57 
 
Appendix D. 30-Day Operational Accomplishments Report for ISS 
Increment 63 
16 Dec. 2020 
30-day Operational Accomplishments Report  
… for the International Space Station (ISS) Increment 63 
 
ACME 
Advanced Combustion via Microgravity Experiments 
s-Flame 
Structure and Response of Spherical Diffusion Flames 
The s-Flame investigation is one of several independent experiments that are part of the ACME 
project, which uses a single modular set of hardware to carry out studies of flames burning 
gaseous fuels in the ISS’ Combustion Integrated Rack (CIR).  The first round of s-Flame tests was 
conducted during Increments 60 and 61, while the second round was conducted fully within 
Increment 63.  There were no tests conducted in Increment 62 because of limited crew availability. 
 
Prepared by the PI team and Dennis Stocker (dennis.p.stocker@nasa.gov), the ACME Project 
Scientist, who is the primary contact for s-Flame and ACME information. 
 
 
Principal Investigator (PI): 
Prof. C.K. (Ed) Law, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 
Co-Investigator (Co-I): 
Prof. Stephen D. Tse, Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ 
Lead collaborator: 
Dr. Vladimir V. Gubernov, P.N. Lebedev Physical Institute of the 
Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russia 
NASA Project Scientist (PS): Dennis P. Stocker, NASA Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, OH 
 
 
I.  Introduction 
Tests for the Structure and Response of Spherical Diffusion Flames (s-Flame) experiment were 
conducted in the Combustion Integrated Rack (CIR) on the International Space Station, as part of 
the Advanced Combustion via Microgravity Experiments (ACME) project.  The purpose of s-Flame 
is to advance the ability to predict the structure and dynamics, including extinction and 
instabilities, of both soot-free and sooty flames.  The results may contribute to the development 
of lean-burn engines for improved efficiency and reduced pollutant emissions here on Earth. 
 
The spherical flames are ignited at non-steady conditions and allowed to transition naturally 
towards steady-state or extinction.  Tests are conducted with various inert diluents in both the 
fuel and chamber (oxidizer) atmosphere.  The fuel gases include hydrogen and methane mixtures 
for soot-free flames, and ethylene for sooty flames.  One experimental objective is to identify the 
extinction limits for both radiative and chemical kinetic extinction, i.e., where the flame 
extinguishes from radiative heat loss or is “blown out,” respectively.  Another objective is to 
determine the existence, onset, and nature of pulsating instabilities that have been theoretically 
predicted to occur in flames with certain fuel/inert mixtures at near-limit conditions.  

=== PAGE 58 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
58 
 
 
More specifically, s-Flame has the following experimental objectives: 
A. Measure and characterize the transient structure (such as temperature and species 
distribution) of diffusion flames established at initially non-steady, spherical flame 
structures for mixtures of different H2/CH4/diluent ratios (soot-free) and different 
C2H4/diluent ratios (sooty), for different flow rates.  
B. Determine the quasi-steady convective/chemical-kinetic extinction limits (low system 
Damköhler numbers) and radiative/chemical-kinetic extinction limits (high system 
Damköhler numbers) for mixtures of different H2/CH4/diluent ratios (soot-free) and 
different C2H4/diluent ratios (sooty). 
C. Determine the existence (for different Zeldovich number, Ze), onset (as a function Da), 
and nature (i.e. mode, frequency, amplitude) of pulsating instabilities theoretically 
predicted to occur in transient spherical diffusion flames using fuel/diluent mixtures that 
are above a critical Lewis number, at near-limit conditions. 
 
As suggested by the experiment’s name, s-Flame features a spherically symmetric diffusion 
flame, which is generated by discharging a fuel gas from a porous spherical burner into a still 
oxygen/inert atmosphere in microgravity.  The one-dimensional nature of the system facilitates 
data acquisition, data reduction, and computational simulation. 
 
The space flight program consists of two main parts: (1) Mapping and characterization of the 
motion (e.g., expansion) of spherical diffusion flames subsequent to ignition and at extinction 
because of the finite-rate chemistry and radiative heat loss.  The study is focused on the thermal 
radiation, the adequacy of the detailed chemistry and transport submodels used in 
computational modeling, and the development of flame front instabilities that could modify the 
extinction boundaries.  (2) Studies of the response of characteristically sooty flames to ignition, 
the onset of soot in the expanding flames, the soot radiation, and the soot’s effects on the flame 
spread, extinction, and instability. 
 
Microgravity studies of flames allow for a range of simplifications and provide various advantages 
over normal-gravity studies.  For example, the natural flicker of flames, which is a buoyancy-
driven (i.e., gravity-driven) instability, is eliminated yielding quasi-steady flames in microgravity.  
Characteristic length scales are increased in microgravity flames facilitating analysis of the flame 
structure.  Momentum-dominated flames, which are important for most practical combustion 
systems, can be studied at low velocities to simplify analysis.  Microgravity flames tend to have a 
much stronger sensitivity to their atmosphere and exhibit a much broader range of 
characteristics than normal-gravity flames because of the near absence of buoyant entrainment.  
The long residence times in microgravity flames can lead to strong soot production, but many 
microgravity flames are soot free.  The absence of buoyancy makes microgravity flames 
advantageous for studies of limit and stability behavior where chemical kinetics are important.  
For example, chemi-ion species, electronically-excited chemiluminescent species, are at very low 
concentration in typical flames, making the reduced buoyancy environment valuable for 
evaluating the minor species chemistry.  With these advantages, microgravity testing can lead to 

=== PAGE 59 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
59 
 
new understanding of the complex nature of combustion – regardless of the gravitational 
environment of the combustion application. 
 
 
II.  Methods/Research Operations  
 
A. Discussion of Method/Protocol 
The s-Flame investigation and other ACME experiments are configured, but not 
conducted, by the ISS crew.  The crew’s role is to set up the hardware, gas bottles, etc. 
for each set of tests.  The most common changes include the gas bottles on the 
Combustion Integrated Rack (CIR) and the mass flow controllers on the modular ACME 
chamber insert. 
 
All testing is commanded from the ground, specifically from the Glenn ISS Payload 
Operations Center (GIPOC).  The science portion of the tests were all conducted in a 
nominally automated mode using pre-programmed scripts.  As expected, no s-Flame tests 
were conducted in a ‘manual’ mode, where changes are made to a control parameter in 
response to the analog video downlink and the numerical data available in the telemetry 
stream.  Thus far, that has been the case for all ACME tests, with the mundane exception 
of ‘manually’ halting the test after the flame has extinguished or perhaps if a temperature 
has reached a critical value. 
 
Testing is not conducted when thrusters fire or spacecraft dock or undock from ISS to 
ensure an acceptable acceleration environment. 
 
Data is downlinked between each set of tests, i.e., day of testing, to allow for preliminary 
analysis and requisite planning for subsequent testing. 
 
 
III.  Results 
A. Baselined Activities Completed – Pre-flight, In-flight, Post-Flight 
A total of 276 flames were ignited for the s-Flame experiment, with 29, 116, and 131 
respectively ignited during Increments 60, 61, and 63.  These numbers neglect some 
flames which quenched promptly after ignition.  In this regard, science testing began at 
the end of Increment 60 and the first round of tests were completed during Increment 
61.  No tests were conducted in Increment 62 due to a lack of crew time, where the 
second round of tests were fully conducted during Increment 63. 
 
The tests were conducted in two rounds, where the first was conducted in increments 60 
and 61 featured 145 flames (nominally) in which the fuel and oxygen (i.e., in the chamber 
atmosphere) were diluted with nitrogen.  The second round conducted in increment 63 
featured 131 flames (nominally) in which the fuel and oxygen were instead diluted with 
helium.   

=== PAGE 60 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
60 
 
The s-Flame experiment does not have living subjects like a life science experiment, but 
the tests are independently conducted with various gaseous fuels, including hydrogen, 
methane, hydrogen/methane blends, and ethylene.  These are simple hydrocarbon gases 
for which the chemistry is relatively well understood. 
 
No samples (e.g., of soot) were collected for s-Flame; all of the ISS results were 
electronically transmitted to the ground.  That is furthermore the case for all currently 
planned ACME experiments. 
 
A summary log of the flames ignited for s-Flame, including a limited overview of the test 
conditions, is found in Table 1. 
 
Table 1. Flames ignited for the s-Flame experiment 
Test 
Day1 
Year Month Date 
Atmosphere2 
Fuel bottle 
Flames 
ignited3 
First round of tests, with nitrogen-diluted fuel and oxygen 
19254 
2019 
9 
11 
~21% O2 with N2 
50% C2H4 with N2 
13 
19256 
13 
16 
19304 
10 
31 
45% CH4 with N2 
9 
19308 
11 
4 
~30% O2 with N2 
21 
19352 
12 
18 
~21% O2, with N2 
100% H2 
10 
20006 
2020 
1 
6 
44.4% H2 with CH4 
17 
20013 
13 
66.7% H2 with CH4 
22 
20024 
24 
100% H2 
16 
20029 
29 
50% C2H4 with N2 
21 
Second round of tests, with helium-diluted fuel and oxygen 
20132 
2020 
5 
11 
~21% O2 with He 
25% H2, 20% CH4, 
with He 
7 
20136 
15 
20% H2, 25% CH4, 
with He 
11 
20142 
21 
~30% O2 with He 
30% H2, 15% CH4, 
with He 
17 
20155 
6 
3 
~30% and ~21% O2 
with He 
45% H2 with He 
9 
20160 
8 
45% CH4 with He 
12 
20164 
12 
~30% O2 with He 
20% C2H4 with He 
11 
20170 
18 
~30% and ~21% O2 
with He 
25% C2H4 with He 
20 
20176 
24 
30% C2H4 with He 
23 
20190 
7 
8 
45% H2 with He 
21 
1Test Day includes the year as the first two digits followed by the 3-digit day of the year. 
2Atmosphere is ~1 atm but pressure increases and O2% drops with vitiation.  
3Flames ignited is the number of nominally sustained flames ignited on that day 
(neglecting the day change on ISS). 
 

=== PAGE 61 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
61 
 
Pre-flight and post-flight activities are generally not addressed in this report. 
 
B. List of Preflight, In-flight, Postflight Anomalies 
1. Mission anomalies  
While there were certainly issues with testing discussed in the next section, there 
were no significant anomalies during s-Flame’s Increment 63 testing.  However, 
anomalies did occur during Increment 60 and 61 which led to corrective actions 
and/or make-up testing. 
 
2. Any other difficulties in obtaining scientific data   
Ignition of the flames presented a significant challenge to the experiment during this 
increment.  All of the flame tests were conducted where the fuel and chamber 
atmosphere were both diluted with helium rather than the nitrogen used in 
Increments 60 and 61.  The two gases’ properties are dramatically different making 
comparison testing very desirable for manifestation of different phenomena.  
Helium’s thermal conductivity is notably several times greater than that of nitrogen, 
so considerably more energy and power was required to ignite the flames.  The power 
level was slowly increased from test to test until ignition was finally achieved on the 
ninth test, where only seven flames were ignited of the 15 tests conducted on May 11 
(20132), the first day for flames in Increment 63.  The cautious approach was taken 
because of concerns that the igniter tip might fail (i.e., burn out) if too much power 
was applied.  An igniter failure would have likely halted testing for weeks given the 
need to schedule the commander’s time to replace the igniter tip. 
 
After that first test day, the decision was made to have the igniter replaced with a coil 
rather than loop design which was believed to be more robust because of the thicker 
wire.  Furthermore, the igniter tip had not been replaced in months, and the tips do 
degrade with time, especially when they are not quickly retracted from the ignited 
flames.  The coil igniter was used successfully but still with caution, where flames were 
not always ignited successfully.  Subsequently, some tests were conducted in 
atmosphere with ~30% oxygen (by volume) instead of the planned ~21%.  As one 
would expect, that proved to be helpful for achieving ignition.   But the end result was 
that some tests were conducted with 21% oxygen, some at 30%, and some at both 
nominal concentrations.  Fortuitously, this mixture of conditions may provide deeper 
insight into the mechanisms of flame dynamics and response. 
 
Tests are also unsuccessful when the flame fails to ignite, where that occurred, for 
example, during Increment 61 in tests 19304A4, 19304A6, 19308C1, and 20006A1.  
That can be corrected by adjusting various test parameters and other settings.  In this 
case, adjustments were subsequently made to the ignition position (e.g., after 
19304A4 and 19304A6), the relative timing of the fuel flow and igniter activation (e.g., 
after 19308C1), and the duration of the igniter activation (e.g., after 20006A1).  As 
another example, failed ignition can result from false ignition detection and 

=== PAGE 62 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
62 
 
deactivation resulting from the combination of settings for ignition and detection, 
e.g., the gain for the Photomultiplier Tube (PMT) module measuring the OH* 
chemiluminescence.  The latter, in the ultraviolet at 310 nm, is a good indicator of an 
ignited flame rather than the glowing igniter, which emits primarily in the infrared and 
visible spectrum. 
 
Testing on June 3 (20155) was cut short due to a combination of issues.  The final test 
was aborted due to an error with an Image Processing and Storage Unit (IPSU).  
Consoles needed to be reset for the new increment, and there was an issue with the 
Fuel Oxidizer Management Assembly (FOMA) Control Unit, i.e. the FCU.  Rebooting 
the FCU inadvertently set the valve safety timers to zero, which cannot be reset 
without venting and refilling the combustion chamber with the intended atmosphere.  
Those issues combined with an extended loss of commanding prevented further 
science operations on that day.  Therefore, an additional test day (July 8, i.e., 20190) 
was added to make up for lost science, e.g., where only one test was successfully 
conducted at ~21% oxygen on June 3.   The FCU was off nominal because of a high 
carrier gas pressure in the Gas Chromatograph Instrumentation Package (GCIP).  
Imaging of the hydrogen flames was often an issue, where they were not apparent or hardly 
visible to the operations camera and ACME DataCam, where the latter is the primary camera 
for ACME testing.  The testing with the extremely dim flames was limited to that conducted 
on Dec. 18 (19352), Jan. 24 (20024), June 3 (20155), and July 8 (20190).  This shortcoming 
unfortunately inhibits assessment of the three-dimensional flame symmetry as the two 
intensified cameras were opposite of each other. 
 
The flow ranges of the selected Mass Flow Controllers (MFCs) was found to be a 
challenge, where it was discovered that the goal of studying both kinetic and radiative 
extinction was not always satisfactorily achieved because of flow rate constraints.  
 
At high flow rates, the burner does not produce spherically symmetric flames.  While 
nominally spherical at moderate flow rates, the flame’s center becomes increasing 
offset from the burner center.  More specifically, the flame is shifted toward the 
supply tube indicating that the sintered attachment of the porous sphere to the 
supply tube is more ‘open’ than the pores of the spherical burner.  In other words, the 
flow from the burner is not spherically symmetric.  At sufficiently high flow rates, the 
flame becomes obviously non-spherical, where it can appear to be ellipsoidal or even 
parabolic in shape.  In the latter case, the flame locally quenches near the supply tube. 
 
When at a small fraction of the maximum flow rate, Mass Flow Controller (MFC) 
performance has been seen to be poor during s-Flame testing, i.e., where actual flow 
rate differed from that desired.  However, this was not a surprise to those familiar 
with the hardware. 
 
Flow perturbations have been noticed in some s-Flame tests, where ACME’s MFCs 
used to control the flow of fuel, nitrogen, and oxidizer have unfortunately not always 

=== PAGE 63 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
63 
 
performed satisfactorily.  In tests conducted using the 1-slpm fuel MFC (where the 
flow range is on a nitrogen basis), the flow has been seen to overshoot and 
undershoot when first opening.  Small flow irregularities have been most apparent 
through their effect on the Photomultiplier Tube (PMT) measurements, e.g., of OH* 
and CH* chemiluminescence.  A momentary increase in fuel flow, as has occurred in 
some s-Flame tests, naturally leads to increased light from the flame. The MFCs are 
tested - without flames - after they are first installed.  Adjustments are typically made 
to (1) the setting that controls when the valves open and (2) the Proportional-Integral-
Derivative (PID) settings.  This ACME activity has involved significant testing, where 
there is an assortment of MFCs with different flow ranges for each of the three gas 
types.  While the MFC adjustments have been beneficial, they have not eliminated all 
gas flow problems.  It was seen in prior ACME testing that nitrogen oscillations (if any) 
tend to damp with time, so a nitrogen pre-flow can be used so that such oscillations 
might end before the flame is ignited.  As another measure, the MFCs are re-zeroed 
prior to each test, where that was another measure adopted in earlier ACME testing. 
 
As mentioned previously, s-Flame tests have sometimes automatically aborted 
(because of the controlling software script), where that is normally prior to gas flow 
and the activation of the igniter – which is typical for other ACME experiments.  As a 
result, there was little lost other than the available experimental time in the failed test 
attempt.  ACME aborts normally occur because of communication issues with an IPSU, 
which for example happened for tests 19304A5, 19352D3, 19352P1, 20024N1, and 
20024J1.   A few other tests aborted because flow rates were accidentally specified 
outside of the range of the installed mass flow controller(s), where that included for 
example 19352A1, 19352D2, and 20013C2.  ACME aborts are infrequent, but there 
are sometimes days when they occur repeatedly as can be seen here.  
 
C. Completeness/Quality of Data 
During Increments 60 and 61, nine days of tests were conducted during which 145 flames 
were ignited for the first round of testing.  In contrast, only 29 tests were specified as 
required or highly desired in the ACME Integrated Science Requirements Document 
(ISRD) for that round.  Therefore, a wealth of data was obtained for this round of testing 
which featured gaseous fuels diluted by nitrogen. 
 
However, there was a significant loss of data.  Most importantly, the first fuel bottle 
appeared to leak on installation (in Increment 60) and later on-orbit testing (in Increment 
61) with other hydrogen/methane blends suggests that its fuel mixture would have been 
ideal for achieving science success.  Furthermore, there was significant image data loss 
on two different test days, specifically Sept. 13 (19256) and Dec. 18 (19352).  As a result, 
those test days were nominally repeated on Jan. 29 (20029) and Jan. 24 (20024), 
respectively (i.e., in a reversed order).  For these reasons, a simple comparison of the total 
number of flames ignited (145) with that specified as required or highly desired (29) for 
the first round of testing is somewhat misleading. 
 

=== PAGE 64 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
64 
 
As discussed in the preceding section, the hydrogen and diluted-hydrogen flames were 
not apparent or extremely dim in imaging from the operations camera and ACME 
DataCam.  Neglecting that factor, the cameras are sensitive to radiation where pixels 
gradually become ‘hot’ (i.e., dead) over time.  While these bright spots are addressed in 
image post-processing, they are a degradation of the image quality. 
 
It is possible that the tests are subtly affected by the acceleration environment, but there 
is not obvious indication of this; and it has thus far not been evaluated with available 
measurements from the Space Acceleration Measurement System (SAMS).  
 
D. Status of Data Analysis [provided by Prof. Stephen Tse, Rutgers U.] 
Image files are currently being processed.  Radial positions of maximum CH* 
chemiluminescence is being plotted against time.  Different radii are being considered 
and plotted together, as some flames are not completely symmetric.  MFC and PMT data 
are being compared with video images to assess and confirm experimental settings.  
Radiometer data is being reviewed.  Analyses of the fiber pyrometry data are ongoing. 
MATLAB code is used to isolate fiber images, which are then color assessed for 
temperature. 
 
Computational simulations with detailed chemistry and transport of the test cases are 
underway.  Time-dependent simulations will be compared with the time-dependent 
experimental data, where tracking of the flamefront location is based on 
chemiluminescent emission.  Steady-state simulations will produce the Isola curves 
mapping flame response versus system Damkhöler number for given fuel mixtures.  The 
experimental cases will then be pin-pointed on the computational mappings to assess 
whether the experimental conditions are in quasi-steady state or near extinction limits, 
either kinetic or radiative.  Oscillation behavior will be correlated to possible pulsating 
oscillations found in the simulations. 
 
E. Preliminary Research Findings [provided by Prof. Tse and lightly edited by Stocker] 
The s-Flame experiment utilizes spherically-symmetric diffusion flames and their 
dynamics and responses to investigate fundamental processes, such as extinction, 
instability, and soot formation. 
 
The tests conducted on 19254 (near the end of Increment 60) revealed that a quasi-steady 
flame could be attained for extended duration at low flow rate, i.e., 3 cc/s for 20% 
C2H4/80% N2 (on a volume basis).  The flame was shut down by the automated system 
because the burner reached a cut-off temperature of 250°C.  Although the flame 
oscillated near the end of the test, it was likely due to influence of the burner tube.  
Comparisons with computation simulations will help to clarify the involved processes.  For 
higher flow rates, e.g., 5-10 cc/s, with the same mixture, radiative extinctions were 
observed.  Generally, the flames showed unstable behavior near the burner tube prior to 
extinction, likely because of lack of fuel mixture and heat loss in that region.  Other 

=== PAGE 65 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
65 
 
mixtures, e.g., 25% C2H4/75% N2 and 30% C2H4/70% N2, also showed radiative extinctions 
at higher flow rates.  For some cases, the pyrometry fiber interacted with the flame, 
allowing determination of temperature in on-going analyses.  Soot was observed only 
during ignition, which went away as the flame established itself.  To assess whether these 
nitrogen-diluted ethylene flames are non-sooty or sooty, cases were run where mixtures 
were ignited and established at low flow rates (e.g., 3 cc/s) with low ethylene contents 
(e.g., 25-30% C2H4) and then ramped to high flow rates (e.g., 5-10 cc/s) with higher 
ethylene contents (e.g., 40-50% C2H4).  The flames all radiatively extinguished, but no 
sooting was observed.  Observations of such radiative extinction behavior at high flow 
rates is an achievement because such phenomenon was not observed in our ground-
based studies, given the limited microgravity durations.  Radiative reabsorption extends 
flame size at extinction.  In ISS testing, radiative extinction has been found to be a 
common event, which was predicted computationally, but not observed previously for 
our flame conditions. 
 
The 19256 tests (in Increment 60) were aimed at examining kinetic extinction.  Similar to 
the radiative extinction cases, sufficient microgravity duration is needed to observe 
kinetic extinction because a near steady flame needs to be established first, before ramp 
down in flow rate to find properly the chemical kinetic extinction limit.  High flow rate 
cases (e.g., 13.5 cc/s, 15 cc/s) showed asymmetrical flames which radiatively 
extinguished.  Flow rates were lowered so that quasi-steady flames could be established 
before ramp down in flow rate.  The 15% C2H4 mixtures were not strong enough to sustain 
a quasi-steady flame at 3 cc/s before ramp down.  However, for stronger mixtures, i.e., 
20-30% C2H4, very nice flames were established at 3 cc/s; and kinetic extinctions were 
observed during ramp down before reaching 1 cc/s.  Radiative extinctions for ramp up 
cases were also examined.  Similarly, for stronger mixtures, i.e., 20-30% C2H4, very nice 
flames were established at 3 cc/s; and radiative extinctions were observed during ramp 
up before reaching 8 cc/s. 
 
Testing on 19304 investigated 45% CH4/55% N2 mixtures issuing into an air atmosphere.  
The results indicated that the flow rates specified by the fuel MFC (0.5 slpm) were in the 
regime of kinetic extinction.  Quasi-steady flames could not be established.  Furthermore, 
larger flow rates could not be provided by the MFC, so observations of radiative extinction 
could not be achieved.  Even with a larger capacity MFC, characteristically larger flames 
would be expected to be asymmetric.  As such, nitrogen-diluted methane flames were 
planned to be reexamined in increased oxygen atmosphere, i.e., 30% O2/70% N2. 
 
Consequently, the 19308 tests investigated nitrogen-diluted methane flames in 30% 
O2/70% N2 atmosphere.  Various methane concentrations from 45% down to 15% were 
examined.  For 45% CH4/55% N2, relatively long duration flames of ~15 s and ~10 s were 
established at flow rates of 2 cc/s and 3 cc/s, respectively.  At larger flow rates of 5 and 
9.4 cc/s, the flames expanded to large radii and then extinguished.  These flames 
appeared to demonstrate radiative extinction.  Reduction of flow rate from 2 cc/s to 1 
cc/s resulted in extinction during ramp down, indicating kinetic extinction.  For 30% 

=== PAGE 66 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
66 
 
CH4/70% N2, flow rates of 3, 5, and 10 cc/s produced flames that expanded to extinction 
(assumed radiatively); while reduction of flow rate from 3 to 1 cc/s resulted in presumably 
kinetic extinction during ramp down.  For 25% CH4/75% N2, flow rates of 5 and 10 cc/s 
yielded flames that expanded to extinction.  For 20% CH4/80% N2, constant flow rate of 
10 cc/s created a flame that expanded until extinction (assumed radiatively); while 
reduction of flow rate from 10 cc/s to 1 cc/s resulted in wavering extinction during ramp 
down, suggesting kinetic extinction.  For 15% CH4/85% N2, flames were ignited, but 
extinguished very quickly.  These tests of 19308 suggest that they could manifest both 
radiative and kinetic extinction for the conditions specified. 
 
The 19352 tests examined various concentrations of H2 (45%-70%) diluted with N2 issuing 
into air.  The installed fuel MFC had a maximum output of 0.1 slpm, which unfortunately 
provided a less-than-sufficient flow range where its use may have precluded the study of 
radiative extinction corresponding to larger flame sizes.  Imaging the diluted hydrogen 
flames was a challenge, especially since the hobj image files from the ACME DataCam 
were mis-formatted.  Furthermore, little could be seen in the analog ops imaging, e.g., 
where it, like the DataCam and Cool Flames Investigation (CFI) intensified camera, cannot 
image the ultraviolet OH* flame emission (at 310 nm).  Analysis of images from the Low 
Light Level Ultraviolet (LLL-UV) camera and its OH* filter is ongoing.  And as one might 
expect, little could be seen with the CFI intensified camera using its broadband CH2O filter.  
Quasi-steady flames seem to be present at low flow rates (e.g., 2.4 cc/s for 70% H2), as 
inferred from PMT, pyrometry fiber emission, and burner temperature observations.  
Kinetic extinction seems to occur as the flow rate is ramped down.  There were various 
problems with the IPSU and some tests aborted.  Using the 100% H2 bottle with a higher 
flow rate MFC was later performed for tests of 20024 (see below), which was a make-up 
test day added because of the mis-formatting of the DataCam image files. 
 
The tests conducted on 20006, using the 44.4% H2/55.6% CH4 bottle, examined 20% 
H2/25% CH4/55% N2 mixtures issuing into air.  Flames extinguished, some with wavy 
oscillating behavior prior to extinction.  However, it seems that even for very small flow 
rates, e.g., 2 cc/s, extinction was by the radiative mechanism during flame 
expansion.  There was too little parameter room in terms of flow rate and burner size to 
identify conclusively kinetic extinction during ramp down for these mixtures.  In short, 
radiative extinction (with local flame extinction and re-ignition seemed to occur prior to 
ultimate extinguishment) during flame expansion after ignition was observed.  However, 
it is unclear whether ramping down the flow rate resulted in kinetic extinction.  Detailed 
analyses of the data are needed.  The various cameras seemed to capture the tests well. 
 
The 20013 tests, which used the 66.7% H2/33.3% CH4 bottle, mainly investigated 30% 
H2/15% CH4/55% N2 mixtures issuing into air.  Radiative extinction was difficult to identify 
conclusively because flames with larger flow rates, e.g. 15 cc/s, seemed to last, although 
with patchy extinction areas, until time out.  Larger flow rates could not be examined 
either because of limited MFC range or distorted flame shape cause by burner limitations 
at high flow rates.  Also, kinetic extinction during ramp down could not be identified 

=== PAGE 67 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
67 
 
conclusively, as some flames seemed to extinguish because they were "going into the 
burner." 
 
The 20024 tests using the 100% H2 bottle repeated and augmented conditions for those 
of 19352 where the 0.1-slpm fuel MFC range was too low to examine radiative extinction 
and the analog and intensified cameras did not pick up the flame images at all or well.  
Here, the 0.5-slpm fuel MFC was used and only a fused silica filter was used for the Cool 
Flames Investigation (CFI) intensified camera.  45%-15% H2/N2 balance mixtures were 
investigated.  The flames at high flow rates, e.g., 10 cc/s, did not extinguish, appearing 
quasi-steady until time out.  The pyrometry fibers glowed, perhaps making good flame-
structure measurements, which will be evaluated subsequently.  The flames seemed to 
extinguish during ramp down, but further analysis is needed to assess kinetic extinction. 
 
The tests conducted on 20029 used 50% C2H4/50% N2 and repeated and augmented 
conditions of 19256, when the images were not good.  Again, the results indicated both 
kinetic and radiative extinction phenomena under corresponding conditions.  However, 
no sooting flames were established, necessitating 100% C2H4 and an enriched oxygen 
atmosphere to facilitate sooting behavior in possible future tests. 
 
The 20132 tests kicked off a round of tests with helium-diluted fuel and oxidizer.  The 
ambient was 21% O2 and 79% He.  The fuel was composed of 25% H2, 20% CH4, and 55% 
He.  Using He as inert made igniting the mixture much more difficult compared to that for 
the N2 inert cases of Round 1, using the same ignition parameters.  The reason is believed 
to be due to the 6X higher value in thermal conductivity of He versus that of N2.  As a 
result, ignition parameters were varied, e.g., with a longer preheat time and higher 
power, to achieve ignition for the He-diluted mixtures and ambient.  The tests produced 
flames at 3, 5, 7, and 10 cc/s that expanded outwardly quickly and extinguished.  For 5, 7, 
and 10 cc/s, the flames seemed to disappear and 're-ignite' with a "flash" before final 
extinction.   We are currently investigating the flash phenomenon.  Moreover, the 
radiation mechanism is not conclusive, as it appears different than for the N2-diluted 
cases.  We did not have a chance to examine lowering of flow rates to assess kinetic 
extinction. 
 
The 20136 tests examined 20% H2/25% CH4/55% He issuing into 21% O2/He.  For 5 cc/s 
and 7 cc/s, the mixture ignites but immediately extinguishes, with almost no observable 
flame-front expansion.  For 10, 13, 15, and 17.5 cc/s, the mixtures ignite, expand quickly, 
and extinguish.  We believe that the extinction mechanism is radiative and will compare 
with computational simulations.  For the cases with a ramp down in flow rate, the flames 
seemed to extinguish before ramp down.  Thus, we were not able to assess purely kinetic 
extinction.  Ignition parameters were varied to investigate thresholds for igniting the 
mixture for different flow rates.  Only flow rates above 7 cc/s showed flame-front 
expansion leading to extinction, with 17.5 cc/s showing a flash or wavering of the flame 
before final extinction. 
 

=== PAGE 68 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
68 
 
The tests conducted on 20142 investigated 30% H2/15% CH4/55% He issuing into 30% 
O2/He.  Elevated oxygen was approved for study, since ignition and extinction limits in 
previous testing were affected by the high thermal conductivity of He.  For 5, 7, 10, 15, 
13, and 16.5 cc/s flow rates, nice flames were established that expanded to 
wavy/oscillating extinction at the end, indicative of radiative extinction.  For the cases 
with a ramp down in flow rate, the flames seemed to extinguish during the ignition flow 
rate stage before ramp down.  Thus, we were not able to assess kinetic extinction. 
 
The 20155 tests examined 45% H2/55% He issuing into 30% O2/He and 21% O2/He.  
Previous tests using He as inert had shown that much larger energy and power are needed 
to ignite the mixtures.  For the 30% O2/H2 atmosphere, the tests produced flames at 10 
and 14 cc/s (MFC limit of 1 SLMP) that expanded after ignition, but were extinguished by 
the automated protocol because the burner reached the 250°C temperature limit before 
any self-extinction could occur.  The flames were not too large at the end.  Presumably, 
the thermally-conductive He diluent facilitates heat transfer to the burner.  For the cases 
with a ramp down in flow rate, i.e., starting at 10 and 14 cc/s and ramping down, the 
flames seemed to self-extinguish during ramp down.  Flow rate at 5 cc/s results in flames 
that only existed briefly.  Extinction at this lower flow rate is probably due to heat loss to 
the burner, rather than pure kinetic extinction.  Ramp down from 14 cc/s towards 5 cc/s 
resulted in the burner reaching the 250°C limit during ramp down.  More analyses are 
needed.  Tests at 21% O2/He atmosphere were limited.  Fuel flow of 5 cc/s showed flash 
ignition, but no sustained flame.  Meanwhile, 10 cc/s resulted in a flame that seemed to 
expand to self-extinction. 
 
Testing on 20160 investigated 45% CH4/55% He issuing into 30% O2/He and 21% O2/He.  
Without H2 in the mixture, even larger energy and power were needed to ignite the 
mixtures.  For the 30% O2/H2 atmosphere, the 5, 10, and 15 cc/s flow rates were sooty 
only at ignition; and the subsequent non-sooty flames expanded to self-extinction.  At 3 
and 4 cc/s, the mixtures flashed at ignition, and extinguished almost immediately.  It was 
not clear whether extinction was due to kinetic extinction or heat loss to the burner.  At 
6 and 7 cc/s, flames ignited with less soot, expanding with no soot to self-extinction.  The 
case with a ramp down in flow rate could not conclusively identify kinetic extinction.  
More analysis is needed.  Tests at 21% O2/He atmosphere needed even more energy and 
power for ignition.  At 5, 7, 10, and 15 cc/s, flames ignited with soot, and expanded quickly 
to extinction. 
 
The 20164 tests began study of ethylene-based flames, where 20% C2H4/80% He issued 
into 30% O2/He and 21% O2/He atmospheres.  For 5 cc/s, the flame expanded and 
remained quasi-steady until the burner limit temperature (250°C) was reached.  At 6, 7, 
10, and 15 cc/s, the flames expanded to extinction, with the higher flow rates (i.e., 10 and 
15 cc/s) exhibiting sooty ignition.  Fuel flow of 5.5 cc/s seemed to correspond to a 
condition where the onset of oscillating extinction was simultaneous with the burner 
reaching the 250°C temperature limit.  For the cases with a ramp down in flow rate, the 
flames seemed to extinguish during ramp down, but heat loss to the burner may be the 

=== PAGE 69 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
69 
 
mechanism of extinction.  Although 13 tests were conducted with the 21% O2/He 
atmosphere, ignition was not achieved. 
 
The tests performed on20170 investigated 25% C2H4/75% He issuing into 30% O2/He and 
21% O2/He.  At 5 and 5.5 cc/s, nice blue chemiluminescent flames were ignited, but 
eventually were cut off because of the burner temperature limit being reached.  At 6 cc/s, 
a nice blue flame was ignited which expanded slowly to extinction.  At 7, 10, and 15 cc/s, 
sooty ignition occurred, but as the flames expanded, the soot went away, eventually 
resulting in radiative extinction.  By ramping the flow rates up, starting at 5 cc/s, soot at 
ignition was minimized, and the flames could expand to extinction.  Ramp down of the 
flow rate resulted in almost immediate extinction.  For tests at 21% O2/He atmosphere, 
cases at 5, 10, and 15 cc/s resulted in flames that expanded quickly to extinction.  Less 
soot was present at ignition compared with that for the 30% O2/He atmosphere cases.  
Consistent ignition was not always achieved for the same conditions, which is puzzling. 
 
Testing on 20176 explored 30% C2H4/70% He issuing into 30% O2/He and 21% O2/He.  At 
5 cc/s, a long duration flame was established that eventually reached the burner 
temperature limit.  At 6, 7, 10, and 15 cc/s, the flames were sooty at ignition, but the soot 
dissipated; and they expanded to extinction.  Ramping up the flow rates, starting at 5 cc/s, 
minimized soot at ignition and resulted in flames that slowly expanded to extinction.  For 
tests at 21% O2/He atmosphere, cases at 5, 10, and 15 cc/s resulted in flames that 
expanded to extinction.  At 4 cc/s, the flame lasted a while before eventual extinction.  
The 3 cc/s case did not ignite.  Ramp down of the flow rate seemed to result in flames 
that extinguished quickly before the protocol could ramp down the flow rate. 
 
The last testing of Round 2, which was a makeup of 20155, occurred on 20190, with 45% 
H2/55% He issuing into 30% O2/He and 21% O2/He.  For both oxygen concentration 
environments, flow rates resulting in expanding flames lasted for a while, but were cut 
off by automated protocol before self-extinction when the burner temperature limit was 
reached.  As for cases where the flow rates were ramped down, extinction detection was 
observed for both oxygen concentration environments.  We are currently analyzing the 
data to determine if extinction was kinetic or due to heat loss to the burner.  A last set of 
tests were conducted with a reduced oxygen concentration atmosphere, i.e., 17.5% 
O2/82.5% He.  Some cases indicated that radiative and kinetic extinction were possibly 
observed. 
 
In summary, selected preliminary findings from this testing include: 
o Cases run for nitrogen-diluted methane and ethylene flames and in air seemed to 
indicate kinetic extinction at low flow rates and radiative extinction at high flow 
rates.  As previously mentioned above (and in our report for the preceding 
increment pair), such phenomena were not observed in our ground-based 
research, given the limited microgravity durations.  Nevertheless, comparisons 
with computational simulations are needed to assess better the extinction 
behavior. 

=== PAGE 70 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
70 
 
o Cases run for nitrogen-diluted hydrogen flames seemed to show kinetic extinction 
at ramp down.  However, for the mass flow rates that could be accommodated, 
radiative extinction was not observed.   
o Cases run for nitrogen-diluted hydrogen/methane mixture flames manifested 
extinction, which are presumed to be radiative.  However, kinetic extinction at low 
flow rates could not be identified.  More analyses of the data are needed. 
o Cases for helium-diluted cases shifted the extinction limits with respect to the 
nitrogen-diluted cases.  In general, kinetic extinction was difficult to observe for 
the conditions examined.  More analyses are needed to assess instability near the 
flame limits, which was predicted to occur computationally. 
 
Early ISS results were presented in the following presentations: 
1. Chung K. Law and Stephen Tse, “ACME - s-Flame,” ISS Increments 61 & 62 Science 
Symposium, 17-19 Sept. 2019.  (oral presentation) 
2. Stephen D. Tse, Jonathan Shi, Delin Zhu, and Chung K. Law, “Dynamics of Burner-
Generated Spherical Diffusion Flames In Microgravity,” 35th Annual Meeting of 
the American Society for Gravitational and Space Research, Denver, CO, 20-23 
Nov. 2019. (poster presentation) 
3. Jonathan Shi, Stephen D. Tse, Dennis Stocker, and Chung K. Law, “ISS Experiments 
of Gaseous Spherical Diffusion Flames,” 36th Annual Meeting of the American 
Society for Gravitational and Space Research, 5-6 Nov. 2020. (pre-recorded oral 
presentation)  
  
F. Communication Imagery 
1. Still Imagery 
Photos are available online at www.flickr.com/photos/space-flames.  Although the 
Facebook page at www.facebook.com/space.flames is meant to provide updates on 
ACME and related combustion research, it is good source for recent photos, e.g., of 
flames, that may not be available on the Flickr site.  Additional photographs may be 
requested from the Project Scientist, Dennis Stocker (dennis.p.stocker@nasa.gov).  
 
2. Video 
‘The Power of Studying Combustion on the ISS,’ which was developed with input from 
the ACME Project Scientist, is available at https://science.nasa.gov/science-
news/news-articles/the-power-of-studying-combustion-on-the-iss. 
 
Video(s) describing the ACME project can be found at  
https://www1.grc.nasa.gov/space/iss-research/iss-fcf/cir/acme/. 
 
Videos related to s-Flame and other microgravity combustion research can also be 
seen on Facebook at www.facebook.com/space.flames. 
 
 
 

=== PAGE 71 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
71 
 
Contact Dennis Stocker (dennis.p.stocker@nasa.gov) for access to those videos or for 
additional videos. 
 
 
IV. Additional Comments from science team 
Product references are included for clarification and do not indicate an endorsement by NASA or 
the federal government. 
 
 

=== PAGE 72 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
72 
 
Appendix E. Operational Timeline 
This summary timeline of s-Flame operations was prepared by Dennis Stocker, where the red text indicates 
the key days when flames were ignited.  The dates for crew activities were based on plans, where it is 
possible that the dates for some simple tasks, e.g., hardware gather or stowage, may have shifted slightly. 
 
Date  
GMT 
Activity 
s-Flame round 1, featuring nitrogen dilution 
2019 
July 30 
211 
Bottle swaps by Koch 
July 31 
212 
Bottle trouble shooting by Hague 
Aug. 7 
219 
Bottle swap by Parmitano 
Aug. 13 
225 
Hardware gather, chamber insert reconfigure, and window cover removal for 
s-Flame by Koch 
Aug. 14 
226 
Hardware stow by Koch 
Aug. 15 
227 
Hardware check-out, etc. in preparation for s-Flame 
Sept. 9 
252 
Bottle swap by Koch 
Sept. 11 
254 
s-Flame tests using 50% C2H4 with N2 
Sept. 13 
256 
s-Flame tests using 50% C2H4 with N2 
Sept. 23 
266 
Swap of bottles and fuel Mass Flow Controller by Parmitano 
Sept. 25 
268 
MFC testing and tuning, launch of Skripochka, Meir, and Mansouri  
Sept. 27 
270 
IPSU-G diagnostic testing 
Oct. 2-3 
275-276 
IPSU-G diagnostic testing 
Oct. 24 
297 
IPSU-G replacement by Meir 
Oct. 28 
301 
IPSU-G checkout 
Oct. 31 
304 
s-Flame tests using 45% CH4 with N2 
Nov. 4 
308 
s-Flame tests using 45% CH4 with N2 
Nov. 18 
322 
GC sampling with check gas, file maintenance 
Nov. 19 
323 
Bottle swaps by Morgan 
Dec. 13 
347 
Swap of fuel and nitrogen Mass Flow Controllers by Morgan 
Dec. 18 
352 
s-Flame tests using 100% H2 
Dec. 24 
358 
Swap of fuel and nitrogen Mass Flow Controllers by Parmitano 
2020 
Jan. 2 
002 
Bottle swap by Skripochka (with Parmitano’s assistance) 
Jan. 6 
006 
s-Flame tests using 44.4% H2 with CH4 
Jan. 8 
008 
Bottle swap by Skripochka 
Jan. 13 
013 
s-Flame tests using 66.7% H2 with CH4 
Jan. 17 
017 
Bottle swaps by Skripochka 
Jan. 24 
024 
s-Flame tests using 100% H2 
Jan. 28 
028 
Bottle swap by Skripochka 
Jan. 29 
029 
s-Flame tests using 50% C2H4 with N2 
s-Flame round 2, featuring helium dilution 
April 9 
100 
Launch of Cassidy, Ivanishin, and Vagner 
April 23 
114 
Swap of FOMA calibration unit by Cassidy 
April 24 
115 
FOMA calibration by Cassidy 
April 28 
119 
Swap of fuel Mass Flow Controller and setting of valve timers by Cassidy 
April 29 
120 
MFC testing & tuning 

=== PAGE 73 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
73 
 
May 1 
122 
Bottle swap by Ivanishin (with Cassidy’s assistance) 
May 11 
132 
s-Flame tests using 25% H2 / 20% CH4, with He 
May 13 
134 
Bottle swaps by Ivanishin 
May 15 
136 
s-Flame tests using 20% H2 / 25% CH4, with He 
May 19 
140 
Bottle swaps by Ivanishin  
May 21 
142 
s-Flame tests using 30% H2 / 15% CH4, with He  
May 26 
147 
Bottle swaps by Ivanishin  
June 2 
154 
Swap of igniter tip (to coil type) and fuel Mass Flow Controller by Cassidy, 
hardware checkout 
June 3 
155 
s-Flame tests using 45% H2 with He 
June 4 
156 
Bottle swap by Ivanishin 
June 8 
160 
s-Flame tests using 45% CH4 with He 
June 10 
162 
Bottle swap by Ivanishin 
June 12 
164 
s-Flame tests using 20% C2H4 with He 
June 16 
168 
Bottle swaps by Ivanishin 
June 18 
170 
s-Flame tests using 25% C2H4 with He 
June 19 
171 
Bottle swap by Ivanishin 
June 24 
176 
s-Flame tests using 30% C2H4 with He 
July 6 
188 
Bottle swaps by Ivanishin 
July 8 
190 
s-Flame tests using 45% H2 with He 
 
 
 
 

=== PAGE 74 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
74 
 
Appendix F. Astronauts and Cosmonauts who Conducted ISS 
Operations for s-Flame 
This list was prepared by Dennis Stocker from his log of ACME operations. 
 
Eight cosmonauts and astronauts participated in ISS operations for this investigation, where they are listed 
with the dates of their activity (at least as planned).  They are listed by the number of days in which they 
conducted supporting on-orbit activities and alphabetically.  The crew activity on each of those dates is 
very briefly summarized in the Appendix D.  Additional information about the crew activity can be found 
in some of the subsequent appendices. 
 
Anatoly Ivanishin (RSA) 
2020 
122, 134, 140, 147, 156, 162, 168, 171, 188 
 
9 days 
 
Chris Cassidy (NASA) 
2020 
114-115, 119, 122 (with Ivanishin), 154  
 
5 days 
Christina Koch (NASA)  
2019 
211, 225-226, 252 
 
 
 
 
4 days 
 
 Oleg Skripochka (RSA) 
2020 
002, 008, 017, 028 
 
 
 
 
4 days 
 
Luca Parmitano (ESA) 
2019 
219, 266, 358 
 
 
 
 
 
3 days 
 
 
 
 
 
2020 
002 (with Skripochka)  
 
 
 
1 day 
 
Drew Morgan (NASA) 
2019 
323, 347 
 
 
 
 
 
2 days 
 
Nick Hague (NASA)  
2019 
212 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 day 
 
Jessica Meir (NASA)  
2020 
297 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 day 
 
 
Together, the 6 men and 2 women represented three space agencies and three nations, namely Italy, 
Russia, and the United States. 
 
 
 
 

=== PAGE 75 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
75 
 
Appendix G. ISS Operations per the Payload Weekly Science Summary 
This section is from Dennis Stocker’s log of ACME operations. 
 
s-Flame round 1, featuring nitrogen dilution 
 
2019 
Week 21: July 26 – August 1 
On GMT 206, we performed the final test points for the first round of testing for ACME Flame Design. Test 
points were performed using ethylene fuel (sometimes diluted) in a chamber environment of air (21% 
oxygen, 79% nitrogen at 1 atm). The flames for these tests were short-lived and non-sooty—unlike the 
flames from the tests at higher oxygen concentrations. The goal of Flame Design is to improve our 
understanding of soot processes so that flames can be “designed” to be soot free. 
 
To prepare for the start of ACME s-Flame (Structure and Response of Spherical Diffusion Flames), Christina 
Koch replaced the bottles on CIR Manifolds #2 and #4 on GMT 211. While monitoring the bottle pressures, 
it was noted that the pressure of the bottle at Manifold #4 was slowly decreasing. The rack was powered 
down, and Nick Hague and Luca Parmitano both helped with troubleshooting operations. Currently, a 
forward plan is being developed. 
 
Week 22: August 2 - 8 
On GMT 219, Luca Parmitano replaced the CIR Manifold #4 bottle, which was losing pressure while 
installed and the valve opened, with a known good bottle. While monitoring, the known good bottle 
maintained its pressure! Next week, we plan to continue transitioning to the next ACME experiment, s-
Flame (Structure and Response of Spherical Diffusion Flames). 
 
Week 23: August 9 - 15 
On GMT 225, Christina Koch configured the ACME Chamber Insert and the CIR Combustion Chamber to 
support the next ACME experiment, s-Flame (Structure and Response of Spherical Diffusion Flames). 
 
 
Week 27: September 6 - 12 
On GMT 254, the first test points were performed for ACME s-Flame (Structure and Response of Spherical 
Diffusion Flames) with 13 spherical flames ignited. This investigation is the fifth to be conducted as part 
of the ACME project, which features studies of burner-stabilized flames of gaseous fuels. s-Flame’s goal is 
to advance our ability to predict the structure and dynamics, including extinction, of both soot-free and 
sooty flames—where today’s testing was focused on soot-free flames. Without the buoyant flows created 
by Earth’s gravity, flames in microgravity are typically spherical, which allows the analysis to focus on the 
combustion chemistry and details of the transport phenomena.  
 
CAPTION TO VIDEO, WHICH IS NOT INCLUDED IN THIS LOG 
In this test point video, a non-sooty (blue) flame is ignited with a retracting hot-wire igniter, where 
the gaseous fuel is flowing from a porous spherical burner. After ignition, the flame grows slightly 
as a result of the diminishing oxygen gradient. An array of 14-micron ceramic fibers is then moved 
toward the flame, where the temperature of the flame can be determined from the color of the 
fiber’s glow—where yellow is hotter than orange, and orange is hotter than red. While only a 
single fiber can be seen at first, a second becomes visible when the flame suddenly gets bigger 

=== PAGE 76 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
76 
 
and engulfs the first fiber.  The diluted ethylene flow to the burner was abruptly increased and 
made to be more fuel rich. As a result, the flame needed to grow to reach enough oxygen to burn 
all the fuel. 
 
Throughout the test, the spherical flame is open near the burner’s tube because of heat loss. As 
the flame grows, the opening around the tube increases (while the flame weakens and dims). The 
flame edge then pulls away from the burner tube and leaves just a small portion of the spherical 
shell. This large hole in the flame shell allows for fuel and air mixing and the flame momentarily 
reestablishes and brightens before it extinguishes. 
 
Week 28: September 13 - 19 
On GMT 256, 16 spherical flames were successfully ignited for ACME s-Flame (Structure and Response of 
Spherical Diffusion Flames). Even though ethylene’s double bond tends to make it a sooty fuel, these 
nitrogen-diluted ethylene flames were all non-sooty (except for during ignition). For each test point, the 
harp-like array of 14-micron ceramic fibers was used to determine temperatures in or near the flame, 
while an array of thermocouples was used to measure the spread of the thermal field from the flame. 
 
ACME Flame Design Images 
 
These two images are of the same flame at nearly the same time. The image on the left is a false-colored 
image. The porous spherical burner can be seen in the middle of the flame. The flame shell surrounds the 
burner except at the fuel supply tube, which causes the flame to locally quench because of heat loss. A 
glowing ceramic fiber can be seen above the flame, where the fiber’s glow is used to determine the local 
temperature by comparison of the red, green, and blue color planes in a measurement technique known 
as pyrometry. The faint lines at the top of the flame suggest that the fiber may have locally quenched the 
flame even though it was above the flame. 
 
The image on the right is from an intensified camera looking at the emission from the excited molecule 
CH*, which emits a photon of blue 431-nm light when it drops to a lower energy state in a process referred 
to as chemiluminescence. The location of the burner sphere is noticeable due to the diminished light in 
the middle of the flame. The opening in the flame shell due to the burner’s tube is also noticeable. The 

=== PAGE 77 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
77 
 
apparent opening in the top of the flame may be caused by the fiber array arm, which, in this camera’s 
view, blocks the flame. 
In microgravity, flames aren’t supplied oxygen through buoyant convention. As a result, low-momentum 
flames like these in a quiescent (still) atmosphere tend to be quite weak and self-extinguish. Microgravity 
is an extremely useful for environment for this experiment since a key objective is to study flame dynamics 
and extinction. 
 
Week 29: September 20 - 26 
On GMT 266, Luca Parmitano replaced the ACME Fuel Controller and the bottles at CIR Manifold #2 and 
CIR Manifold #4. These changes support the next ACME s-Flame test points, which will be in a chamber 
environment of air (21% oxygen, 79% nitrogen at 1 atm) and will use diluted methane fuel at faster flow 
rates. 
 
Week 5: October 25 - 31 
On GMT 297 on the back of the CIR Optics Bench, Jessica Meir removed a failed hard drive from the FCF 
Image Processor and then replaced the FCF Image Processor. On GMT 301, the CIR was powered up and 
a checkout of the new FCF Image Processor was successful. We returned to performing test points later 
in the week! 
 
Week 6: November 1 - 7 
On GMT 304 and 308, 30 spherical flames were successfully ignited for ACME s-Flame (Structure and 
Response of Spherical Diffusion Flames). These tests burned methane fuel diluted with nitrogen in 
atmospheres of 21% and 30% oxygen (with a balance of nitrogen). Methane is the primary component of 
natural gas. These test points focused on determining where the radiative heat loss or velocities are too 
high for the flame to be sustained, which are known as the radiative and convective extinction limits. 
Radiative heat transport is much more important under microgravity conditions because the hot gases 
don’t buoyantly rise from the flame. 
 
ACME s-Flame Images 
 
This figure shows three flames of 45% methane burning in 30% oxygen. The gaseous methane fuel flows 
from the porous sphere of the burner, which is visible in the flame’s center. The flow of fuel increases 
from left to right, which increases the size of the flame. The burner’s fuel supply tube is visible below the 
sphere. The flame loses heat to this tube causing an opening, which typically grows with time as the flame 
weakens. In the flame on the right, the opening is comparatively small, which signifies a stronger flame. 
 

=== PAGE 78 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
78 
 
In the left and center images, the glow of a 14-micron ceramic fiber is visible above the flame. Where the 
fiber is visibly glowing, the flame’s temperature at that point can be determined via color-ratio pyrometry, 
which uses a color camera characterized for that purpose. The faint glow of a second fiber further from 
the flame can be seen at the top of the center image. When the image on the right was captured, the fiber 
array was not yet inserted into the flame. 
 
Week 8: November 15 - 21 
On GMT 323, Drew Morgan replaced the bottles at CIR Manifold #2 and CIR Manifold #4 to support ACME 
s-Flame test points using pure hydrogen fuel in air (21% oxygen, 79% nitrogen at 1 atm). 
 
Week 12: December 13 - 19 
On GMT 347, Drew Morgan replaced the ACME Bypass and Fuel Controllers to support the ACME s-Flame 
(Structure and Response of Spherical Diffusion Flames) test points on GMT 352, which flowed nitrogen 
and fuel at slower flow rates.  
 
Ten flames were successfully ignited on GMT 352. These tests were conducted with nitrogen-diluted 
hydrogen fuel making the flames very faint. The CIR is equipped with an intensified camera, which images 
these very faint flames by visualizing the ultraviolet emission of the OH molecule (at 310 nm) as it drops 
to a lower energy level. This process is known as chemiluminescence. Thus far, there has only been a 
preliminary review of some image data. These tests used hydrogen fuel in differing concentrations with 
both steady and ramped flow rates. The tests with ramped flow rates investigated extinction 
characteristics of the flame. 
 
Week 14: December 27 - January 2 
On GMT 358, Luca Parmitano replaced the ACME Bypass and Fuel Controllers to support ACME s-Flame 
(Structure and Response of Spherical Diffusion Flames) test points with faster nitrogen and fuel flow rates. 
 
On GMT 002, Oleg Skripochka and Luca Parmitano replaced the bottle at CIR Manifold #4 to support ACME 
s-Flame test points using a hydrogen/methane fuel mixture in air (21% oxygen, 79% nitrogen at 1 atm). 
 
 
2020 
Week 15: January 3 - 9 
On GMT 006, 17 flames were successfully ignited for ACME s-Flame (Structure and Response of Spherical 
Diffusion Flames), which uses spherically-symmetric diffusion flames to investigate fundamental 
processes, such as flame extinction. These tests were conducted with a mixture of hydrogen (20%), 
methane (25%), and nitrogen (55%) ejected from the porous spherical burner into a chamber atmosphere 
of air (21% oxygen, 79% nitrogen at 1 atm). The dim, soot-free flames exhibited local quenching due to 
radiative heat loss and reignition, which sometimes occurred repeatedly. In these cases, the dynamic parts 
of the broken flame sometimes appear to dance around the burner.  
 
CAPTION TO VIDEO, WHICH IS NOT INCLUDED IN THIS LOG 
In this test point video, a non-sooty (blue) flame is ignited with a retracting hot-wire igniter. The 
harp-like array of 14-micron ceramic fibers moves in from the left to a fixed position. The glow 
from the fibers allows for a good estimation of the local temperature. The flame starts “dancing,” 
where it partially quenches due to radiative heat loss and the remaining flame stretches and 
circles around the burner through a repeated combination of quenching and reignition. The fuel 

=== PAGE 79 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
79 
 
and oxygen, which are normally separated by the flame, mix where the flame quenches, making 
the local gas more flammable.   
 
Week 16: January 10 - 16 
On GMT 013, 22 flames were successfully ignited for ACME s-Flame (Structure and Response of Spherical 
Diffusion Flames), which is a record number of sustained flames in a single day of testing for all the ACME 
experiments! Like the tests performed on GMT 006, these tests burned a mixture of hydrogen, methane, 
and nitrogen but with a greater hydrogen concentration relative to the methane concentration. Even 
though these flames were less dynamic than the “dancing” flames from GMT 006, they did break apart 
and create flamelets. The flamelets were about 1 cm across and were shaped like curved bands or circles 
rather than spheres or ellipsoids. 
 
 
This figure shows four different tests from GMT 013, where the flow rate of the hydrogen/methane fuel 
increases from left to right while the nitrogen flow rate remains constant. The burner, with its supply tube 
and porous sphere, is opposite the flame. The fuel and nitrogen both flow from the burner sphere into a 
chamber atmosphere of ~19% oxygen and nitrogen at a pressure of ~1 atm. 
 
The bright horizontal lines in each flame are the glowing 14-micron ceramic fibers, where that glow can 
be used to determine the flame’s temperature. As the fuel flow rate increases, the flames become larger 
and separate flamelets form. For these tests, the flow rate was increased to explore flame stability and 
extinction limits. 
 
Week 17: January 17 - 23 
On GMT 017, Oleg Skripochka replaced the bottles at CIR Manifold #2 and CIR Manifold #4 to support 
ACME s-Flame test points using pure hydrogen fuel in air (21% oxygen, 79% nitrogen at 1 atm). 
 
Week 18: January 24 - 30 
On GMT 024, 16 flames were successfully ignited for ACME s-Flame (Structure and Response of Spherical 
Diffusion Flames). These tests were conducted with nitrogen-diluted hydrogen fuel making the flames 
very faint. Even though the flames were barely visible, their presence was obvious due to the 
measurements of various instrumentation, including thermocouples, radiometers, and photomultiplier 
tubes. The glowing ceramic fibers were also a positive indication of a flame. The harp-like array of 14-
micron ceramic fibers was translated into the flame to make optical measurements of the flame 
temperature from the hot fibers’ visible glow. 
 
Week 19: January 31 - February 6 
On GMT 029, 21 flames were successfully ignited for ACME s-Flame (Structure and Response of Spherical 
Diffusion Flames). These were the final tests for the first round of testing for s-Flame. In this round, a total 

=== PAGE 80 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
80 
 
of 145 flames were ignited using nitrogen-diluted gaseous fuels. In the upcoming second round, tests will 
be conducted with the same fuels but diluted with helium, which has much different transport properties 
than nitrogen.  
 
CAPTION TO VIDEO, WHICH IS NOT INCLUDED IN THIS LOG 
In this test point video, a sooty (yellow) flame is ignited with a retracting hot-wire igniter. This 
flame is burning ethylene fuel diluted by nitrogen. Ethylene’s double bond tends to make flames 
sooty. However, the soot (which is black, but thermally glows yellow) quickly disappears, leaving 
a blue soot-free spherical flame. 
 
Following ignition, the flame grows to reach enough oxygen to consume the fuel. The harp-like 
array of 14-micron ceramic fibers moves in from the left to a fixed position. The glow from the 
fibers allows for a good estimation of the local temperature. These flames are a bit like bubbles, 
where the fuel is within the flame, the oxygen is outside of it, and the light, heat, and chemical 
products are emitted at the surface where they come together and react. 
 
The base of the flame begins to retreat from the burner’s fuel supply tube due to heat loss. Both 
the flame and the glowing fibers can be seen to dim as the flame weakens. Eventually the base of 
the flame begins to oscillate. The flame locally quenches—creating a hole in the flame. This hole 
allows for increased mixing of the fuel and oxygen, which in turn allows the flame to temporarily 
recover. As the oscillations grow in strength, the flame goes out. 
 
s-Flame round 2, featuring helium dilution 
 
Week 2: April 17 - 23 
On GMT 114, Chris Cassidy replaced the CIR FOMA Cal Unit on the back of the CIR Optics Bench. This 
activity allowed us to perform the calibration of the CIR’s FOMA (Fuel/Oxidizer Management Assembly) 
system. This calibration needs to be completed yearly to ensure that all the pressure transducers in the 
CIR are accurate. 
 
On GMT 115, in support of the CIR FOMA Calibration, Chris Cassidy closed and opened valves on the gas 
bottles installed in CIR. 
 
Week 3: April 24 - 30 
On GMT 119, Chris Cassidy replaced the ACME Fuel Controller and set the CIR Valve Timers to support the 
upcoming second round of testing for ACME s-Flame (Structure and Response of Spherical Diffusion 
Flames) starting in a couple weeks. 
 
s-Flame’s goal is to advance our ability to predict the structure and dynamics, including extinction, of both 
soot-free and sooty flames. Without the buoyant flows created by Earth’s gravity, flames in microgravity 
are typically spherical, which allows the analysis to focus on the combustion chemistry and details of the 
transport phenomena. Results may lead to more efficient and less polluting combustion technology for 
use on Earth. 
 
 
 

=== PAGE 81 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
81 
 
Week 4: May 1 - 7 
On GMT 122, Anatoly Ivanishin and Chris Cassidy replaced three CIR Manifold Bottles to support the 
upcoming second round of testing for ACME s-Flame (Structure and Response of Spherical Diffusion 
Flames) starting next week. 
 
s-Flame’s goal is to advance our ability to predict the structure and dynamics, including extinction, of both 
soot-free and sooty flames. Without the buoyant flows created by Earth’s gravity, flames in microgravity 
are typically spherical, which allows the analysis to focus on the combustion chemistry and details of the 
transport phenomena. Results may lead to more efficient and less polluting combustion technology for 
use on Earth. 
 
Week 5: May 8 - 14 
On GMT 132, we began the second round of testing for ACME s-Flame (Structure and Response of 
Spherical Diffusion Flames) with seven flames ignited using a hydrogen/methane fuel mixture diluted with 
helium. While the first round of testing used nitrogen to dilute the atmosphere and fuels, this round of 
testing uses helium. Helium is more diffusive and has a greater thermal conductivity than nitrogen. These 
factors can strongly influence combustion, which when coupled with the microgravity environment, can 
lead to new insight and understanding. 
 
On GMT 134, Anatoly Ivanishin replaced the bottles on the CIR Manifold #4 and the CIR Check Gas 
Manifold to continue supporting s-Flame test points.  
 
CAPTION TO VIDEO, WHICH IS NOT INCLUDED IN THIS LOG 
In this test point video, a porous sphere at the end of the burner’s fuel supply tube is used to 
create spherical flames. The gaseous fuel is ejected from this sphere, and the flame is ignited with 
a retracting hot-wire igniter. The flame “retreats” from the burner’s tube due to heat loss leaving 
just a flame “cap.” As the igniter retracts, a second ignition occurs while the flame “cap” is still 
burning. This second flame, which is large and spherical, is initially bright but quickly fades and 
extinguishes. We’re not sure what caused the second ignition, but regardless, the resulting data 
provides an opportunity to learn about the inner workings of flames. 
 
s-Flame’s goal is to advance our ability to predict the structure and dynamics, including extinction, 
of both soot-free and sooty flames. Without the buoyant flows created by Earth’s gravity, flames 
in microgravity are typically spherical, which allows the analysis to focus on the combustion 
chemistry and details of the transport phenomena. Results may lead to more efficient and less 
polluting combustion technology for use on Earth. 
 
Week 6: May 15 - 21 
On GMT 136, 11 flames were successfully ignited for ACME s-Flame (Structure and Response of Spherical 
Diffusion Flames). These tests burned a hydrogen/methane fuel mixture diluted with helium but with a 
different ratio of flammable gases than investigated in the first test day. The results from both days will 
be compared with those from a third ratio, which will be tested on our next test day. On GMT 140, Anatoly 
Ivanishin replaced the bottles at CIR Manifold #1 and CIR Manifold #4 to support ACME s-Flame test points 
using the third hydrogen/methane fuel mixture diluted with helium. 
 
 
 

=== PAGE 82 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
82 
 
ACME s-Flame Test Point Image 
 
In this false-colored preliminary image, the flame encompasses the porous spherical burner and its fuel 
supply tube. The bright lines at the top are 14-micron ceramic fibers that are glowing because of the 
flame’s heat. Where the fibers are visibly glowing, the flame’s temperature at that point can be 
determined by color-ratio pyrometry, which uses a color camera characterized for that purpose. 
Qualitatively, a yellow glow is hotter than orange, which is in turn hotter than red—just like metal in a 
forge. Given the extremely fine fibers, the measurement effectively provides the flame temperature, 
which can be compared with the results of computational modeling. 
 
s-Flame’s goal is to advance our ability to predict the structure and dynamics, including extinction, of both 
soot-free and sooty flames. Without the buoyant flows created by Earth’s gravity, flames in microgravity 
are typically spherical, which allows the analysis to focus on the combustion chemistry and details of the 
transport phenomena. Results may lead to more efficient and less polluting combustion technology for 
use on Earth. 
 
Week 7: May 22 - 28 
On GMT 142, 17 flames were successfully ignited for ACME s-Flame (Structure and Response of Spherical 
Diffusion Flames). These tests burned a hydrogen/methane fuel mixture diluted with helium but with a 
different ratio of flammable gases than investigated in the first two test days. These tests were performed 
in a chamber environment of 30% oxygen (the remainder was helium); whereas, the first two test days 
were performed in 21% oxygen. Flames are strongly dependent on the oxygen concentration, so these 
flames lasted longer before extinguishing than the earlier tests. On GMT 147, Anatoly Ivanishin replaced 
the bottles at CIR Manifold #2 and CIR Manifold #4 to support ACME s-Flame test points using 45% 
hydrogen fuel diluted with helium.  
 
CAPTION TO VIDEO, WHICH IS NOT INCLUDED IN THIS LOG 
Following ignition in this test point video, the spherical flame expands to reach enough oxygen to 
consume the fuel flowing from the burner. The flame retreats from the burner’s fuel supply tube 
due to heat loss leaving just a flame “cap.” The harp-like array of 14-micron ceramic fibers moves 

=== PAGE 83 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
83 
 
in from the left to a fixed position. The glow from the fibers allows for a good estimation of the 
local temperature. As the flame opens, the fuel and oxygen, which are normally separated by the 
flame, mix together. This mixing allows the flame to temporarily recover. The flame flashes back 
three times before it fully extinguishes. 
 
s-Flame’s goal is to advance our ability to predict the structure and dynamics, including extinction, 
of both soot-free and sooty flames. Without the buoyant flows created by Earth’s gravity, flames 
in microgravity are typically spherical, which allows the analysis to focus on the combustion 
chemistry and details of the transport phenomena. Results may lead to more efficient and less 
polluting combustion technology for use on Earth. 
 
Week 8: May 29 - June 4 
In support of ACME s-Flame (Structure and Response of Spherical Diffusion Flames) test points, Chris 
Cassidy replaced the ACME Igniter Tip and the ACME Fuel Controller on GMT 154. The next day, nine 
helium-diluted hydrogen flames were successfully ignited for s-Flame, where most of these tests were 
performed in a chamber environment of ~30% oxygen with a balance of helium. Previously, similar tests 
were performed with nitrogen dilution, but helium is dramatically different than nitrogen. Helium is more 
diffusive and has a greater thermal conductivity than nitrogen. Studying these differences can enable new 
learning, particularly when combined with the microgravity environment. On GMT 156, Anatoly Ivanishin 
replaced the bottle at CIR Manifold #4 to support ACME s-Flame test points using methane fuel diluted 
with helium. 
 
ACME s-Flame Test Point Image 
 
One benefit of performing combustion research in microgravity is spherical flames. This image 
(preliminary and false-colored) shows a spherical flame of diluted hydrogen ~25 mm in diameter. 
Reducing the flame geometry to a single dimension dramatically simplifies analysis and modeling. It also 
enables computation focused on chemical kinetics and transport phenomena rather than fluid dynamics 
and flame structure. 
 

=== PAGE 84 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
84 
 
The two bright lines above the flame are 14-micron ceramic fibers, which are visibly glowing because of 
the flame’s heat. The temperature distribution along the glowing fiber can be quantified through Thin 
Filament Pyrometry, where the hue is indicative of the temperature. Flame measurements are also made 
with intensified cameras, thermopile detectors, photomultiplier tubes, and thermocouples. All this data 
is used to improve and validate flame modeling and through that enable improvements in practical 
terrestrial combustion. 
 
Week 9: June 5 - 11 
On GMT 160, 12 helium-diluted methane flames were ignited in oxygen/helium atmospheres for ACME s-
Flame (Structure and Response of Spherical Diffusion Flames). Compared to other gaseous hydrocarbon 
fuels, methane (CH4) is more difficult to ignite because of its lack of carbon-carbon bonds. Methane 
ignition hadn’t been an issue in earlier testing with nitrogen dilution, but it was challenging in this week’s 
tests because of helium’s much greater thermal conductivity. Nonetheless, the recently installed coiled 
igniter tip enabled us to ignite these flames.  
 
The results from the current series of s-Flame tests will be compared with the results from the previous 
tests using nitrogen dilution. In that earlier testing, it was found that radiative extinction (i.e., extinction 
caused by radiative heat loss) is a common event, which had been predicted computationally. However, 
we did not observe this in preliminary ground-based testing. It was also seen in the on-orbit tests that 
radiative reabsorption extends the flame size at extinction. Another type of extinction was sometimes 
observed, where the gas velocities caused nitrogen-diluted ethylene flames (under certain conditions) to 
blow out. It will be interesting to see what the future comparisons will reveal about the nature of flames. 
 
On GMT 162, Anatoly Ivanishin replaced the bottle at CIR Manifold #4 to support ACME s-Flame test points 
using 20% ethylene fuel diluted with helium. 
 
Week 10: June 12 - 18 
On GMT 164, 11 helium-diluted ethylene flames were ignited for ACME s-Flame (Structure and Response 
of Spherical Diffusion Flames). This is a shift in testing for the s-Flame experiment from non-sooty fuels 
(i.e., hydrogen, methane, or hydrogen/methane blends) to a sooty fuel. Ethylene (C2H4) tends to be a 
sooty fuel because it has a carbon double-bond. Soot forms when hot fuel combines with itself in the 
absence of oxygen, where the union of fuel molecules is facilitated by the double bond. The flames in 
these tests were sooty at ignition, but the soot quickly disappeared resulting in blue flames, where blue 
is the natural color of flames with hydrocarbon fuels. On GMT 168, Anatoly Ivanishin replaced the bottles 
at CIR Manifold #1, CIR Manifold #2 and CIR Manifold #4 to support ACME s-Flame test points using 25% 
ethylene fuel diluted with helium.  
 
CAPTION TO VIDEO, WHICH IS NOT INCLUDED IN THIS LOG 
This test point video runs at half speed to better show what is happening with the flame. A flame 
of 20% ethylene fuel ignites in a chamber atmosphere of about 30% oxygen (both diluted with 
helium). The flame is initially very bright. Although the soot particles are black, their glow depends 
on their temperature, where yellow is hotter than orange which is in turn hotter than red. While 
some soot clusters escape the flame, much of the soot becomes trapped within the flame by the 
temperature gradient.   
 
After some time, the array of ceramic fibers is translated into the flame to determine the radial 
temperature distribution where the fibers are glowing. Despite their 14-micron diameter, the 

=== PAGE 85 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
85 
 
fibers appear to cool or push away the soot because that side of the flame becomes increasingly 
blue. 
 
The flame becomes all blue and retreats from the fuel supply tube because of heat loss.  The 
opening in the flame allows fuel and oxygen to directly mix, where they are normally separated 
by the presence of the flame shell. This mixing enhances flammability and the reinvigorated and 
locally brighter flame flashes back to the supply tube reestablishing the nominally spherical flame. 
But it is short-lived, and the flame quickly retreats again until it is just a “cap” on the left. Mixing 
again leads to another flame flash, but it quickly extinguishes due to radiative heat loss, heat loss 
to the supply tube, and conductive heat loss enhanced by the helium’s high thermal conductivity. 
 
Week 11: June 19 - 25 
 
On GMT 170, 20 flames were ignited for ACME s-Flame (Structure and Response of Spherical Diffusion 
Flames). These flames burned a 25% ethylene/75% helium blend; whereas, the flames on GMT 164 burned 
a 20% ethylene/80% helium blend. Comparing these data will enable analysis of the effects of this 
fuel/inert blend on flame dynamics, such as extinction behavior and structure. On GMT 171, Anatoly 
Ivanishin replaced the bottle at CIR Manifold #4 to support ACME s-Flame test points using a 30% 
ethylene/70% helium blend. 
 
ACME s-Flame Test Point Image 
 
In this image (preliminary and false-colored), the flame on the right has a higher ethylene concentration 
than the flame on the left. As expected, the flame on the right is larger where the spherical flame expands 
until the fuel reaches enough oxygen to be consumed. 
 
These flames, which are non-premixed, are like bubbles in that the gaseous fuel is inside the bubble and 
the oxygen is outside the bubble. The flame shell, like the film of a bubble, is a thin sheet where the fuel 
and oxygen come together and react, producing light, heat, and chemical products, such as carbon dioxide 
and water vapor.  Meanwhile, the helium—which readily diffuses—is free to cross the flame shell. 
20%
25%

=== PAGE 86 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
86 
 
However, diffusion was minimal because the helium concentrations within the fuel and the surrounding 
atmosphere were similar.  
 
Both flames were bright and sooty at ignition, but these images are from late in each test when the flames 
became dim. The bright lines at the top are the 14-micron ceramic fibers used for optical determination 
of the flame temperature using a camera characterized for that purpose. 
 
s-Flame’s goal is to advance our ability to predict the structure and dynamics, including extinction, of both 
soot-free and sooty flames. Without the buoyant flows created by Earth’s gravity, flames in microgravity 
are typically spherical, which allows the analysis to focus on the combustion chemistry and details of the 
transport phenomena. Results may lead to more efficient and less polluting combustion technology for 
use on Earth. 
 
Week 12: June 26 - July 2 
GMT 176 was a record-breaking day for ACME with 23 flames ignited—the most we’ve ignited in one day! 
We’ve now ignited over 250 flames for s-Flame (Structure and Response of Spherical Diffusion Flames) 
and over 1000 flames for ACME since it started in Nov. 2017. The tests on GMT 176 were performed with 
30% ethylene in helium for comparison with the results from the two preceding test days, which burned 
20% and 25% ethylene/helium blends.  
 
CAPTION TO VIDEO, WHICH IS NOT INCLUDED IN THIS LOG 
In this test point video, helium-diluted ethylene fuel is ignited with a low fuel flow rate to limit 
the soot produced with ignition. After ignition, the flow rate is tripled in a smooth ramp, so that 
the flame response can be observed. As expected, the flame quickly grows, where it must expand 
to reach enough oxygen to consume all the fuel.   
 
Before the fuel flow rate has completely tripled, the flame retreats from the burner’s fuel supply 
tube because of heat loss—creating a hole in the flame near the tube. This hole allows for 
increased mixing of the ethylene and oxygen, which are normally separated by the flame shell. 
This mixing causes the flame to momentarily reestablish around the burner tube with a bright 
flash of light. Mixing again leads to another flame flash, after which the flame fully extinguishes. 
The fuel flow rate did completely triple before the flame extinguished. 
 
Although not visible in the video, the measured OH* and CH* chemiluminescence was relatively 
constant throughout this test with the important exceptions of ignition and the bright flashes of 
light prior to extinction. In contrast, the measured chemiluminescence declined with time in 
similar tests with constant fuel flow rates. OH* and CH* are molecules at an elevated energy state 
which emit a photon of a specific wavelength as their energy level drops a level. The CH* emission 
is the source of most of the blue in a hydrocarbon flame, while the OH* emission is in the 
ultraviolet. ACME uses the latter measurement as an indicator of ignition and extinction because 
it is insensitive to the hot-wire igniter and hot burned gases. 
 
Using this unique microgravity data, the s-Flame investigation seeks to test and improve 
computational models, which may enable improvements to practical combustion on Earth. 
 
 
 

=== PAGE 87 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
87 
 
Week 13: July 3 - 9 
On GMT 188, Anatoly Ivanishin replaced the bottles at CIR Manifold #1, CIR Manifold #2 and CIR Manifold 
#4 to support ACME s-Flame (Structure and Response of Spherical Diffusion Flames) test points using 45% 
hydrogen fuel diluted with helium. On GMT 190, 21 sustained flames using this fuel were ignited for ACME 
s-Flame. These are the final test points for the second round of ACME s-Flame testing. Helium’s 
characteristics are dramatically different from that of nitrogen, which was used for dilution in the first 
round of s-Flame testing. 
 
ACME s-Flame Test Point Image 
 
In this image (preliminary and false-colored), the burner tube and porous sphere are visible in the middle 
of the flame. In this test, a hydrogen/helium blend was ejected into an oxygen/helium atmosphere from 
the porous sphere at the end of the burner. The two bright lines above the flame are 14-micron ceramic 
fibers, which are glowing because of the flame’s heat and are used for optical temperature 
measurements. 
 
s-Flame’s goal is to advance our ability to predict the structure and dynamics, including extinction, of both 
soot-free and sooty flames. Without the buoyant flows created by Earth’s gravity, flames in microgravity 
are typically spherical, which allows the analysis to focus on the combustion chemistry and details of the 
transport phenomena. Results may lead to more efficient and less polluting combustion technology for 
use on Earth. 
 
 

=== PAGE 88 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
88 
 
Appendix H. Crew Activity per Space Station Science Highlights 
The subsequent text and images are from the weekly highlights prepared by the Lead Increment Scientist 
and made available via e-mail or online via www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/station/research/. 
 
Note that hyperlinks were generally not included in the excerpts below, but they typically go to web pages 
accessible via https://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/station/research/experiments/explorer/.  Those 
pages are secondary sources of information for the ACME project, for which the primary web site is 
https://www1.grc.nasa.gov/space/iss-research/iss-fcf/cir/acme/. 
 
s-Flame round 1, featuring nitrogen dilution 
 
Week of July 29, 2019 
Other investigations on which the crew performed work: 
• 
ACME Flame Design, which studies the production and control of soot to optimize oxygen-
enriched combustion and the design of robust, soot-free flames, is part of a series of independent 
ACME experiments using the orbiting laboratory’s Combustion Integrated Rack (CIR). 
The note above is in error, where the first round of Flame Design operations ended with the data 
transfer and downlink on July 26.  Crew activity during this week was in preparation for the s-
Flame experiment.  
 
Week of August 5, 2019 
Other investigations on which the crew performed work: 
• 
ACME Flame Design, which studies the production and control of soot to optimize oxygen-
enriched combustion and the design of robust, soot-free flames, is part of a series of independent 
ACME experiments using the orbiting laboratory’s Combustion Integrated Rack (CIR). 
The note above is in error, where the crew activity during this week was in preparation for the first 
round of the s-Flame experiment.  
 
Week of October 28, 2019 
 
NASA astronaut Jessica Meir works on components of the Combustion Integrated Rack (CIR), a platform 
for the Advanced Combustion via Microgravity Experiments (ACME) project.  This set of six independent 
studies includes ACME Flame Design, which studies the production and control of soot to optimize oxygen-
enriched combustion and the design of robust, soot-free flames.  Credits: NASA 

=== PAGE 89 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
89 
 
 
Week of January 13, 2020 
Other investigations on which the crew performed work: 
• 
Advanced Combustion via Microgravity Experiments (ACME) is a set of six independent studies of 
gaseous flames conducted in the Combustion Integrated Rack (CIR).  ACME supports spacecraft 
fire prevention as well as improved fuel efficiency and reduced pollutant production in practical 
combustion on Earth. 
• 
The Structure and Response of Spherical Diffusion Flames (s-Flame), part of the ACME project, 
advances prediction of the structure and dynamics of soot-free and sooty flames.  Results could 
contribute to engines with improved efficiency and reduced emissions on Earth. 
 
Week of January 27, 2020 
Other investigations on which the crew performed work: 
• 
The Structure and Response of Spherical Diffusion Flames (s-Flame), part of the ACME project, 
advances prediction of the structure and dynamics of soot-free and sooty flames.  Results could 
contribute to engines with improved efficiency and reduced emissions on Earth. 
 
s-Flame round 2, featuring helium dilution 
 
Week of April 27, 2020 
Predicting flame structure 
During the week, the crew prepared for continuation of runs for Structure and Response of Spherical 
Diffusion Flames (s-Flame).  This investigation advances prediction of the structure and dynamics of soot-
free and sooty flames, which could contribute to development of engines with improved efficiency and 
reduced emissions on Earth.  S-Flame is part of the Advanced Combustion via Microgravity Experiments 
(ACME) project, a series of independent studies of gaseous flames performed in the station’s Combustion 
Integrated Rack (CIR).  The project’s primary goals are to improve fuel efficiency and reduce pollutant 
production in routine fuel combustion activities on Earth.  A secondary goal is improving spacecraft fire 
prevention through innovative research focused on materials flammability. 
 
 
NASA astronaut Chris Cassidy works on the Combustion Integrated Rack, a device that enables safe fuel, 
flame and soot studies in microgravity.  Credits: NASA 
 

=== PAGE 90 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
90 
 
Week of May 18, 2020 
Other investigations on which the crew performed work: 
• 
Structure and Response of Spherical Diffusion Flames (s-Flame) studies the structure and 
dynamics of soot-free and sooty flames.  Findings could contribute to development of engines 
with improved efficiency and reduced emissions on Earth.  S-Flame is part of the Advanced 
Combustion via Microgravity Experiments (ACME) project, a series of independent studies of 
gaseous flames performed in the station’s Combustion Integrated Rack (CIR). 
 
 
ROSCOSMOS cosmonaut Anatoly Ivanishin replaces a gas bottle in the Combustion Integration Rack (CIR) 
in preparation for flame studies controlled by the ground.  Credits: NASA 
 
Week of May 25, 2020 
Other investigations on which the crew performed work: 
• 
Structure and Response of Spherical Diffusion Flames (s-Flame) studies the structure and 
dynamics of soot-free and sooty flames.  Findings could contribute to development of engines 
with improved efficiency and reduced emissions on Earth.  S-Flame is part of the Advanced 
Combustion via Microgravity Experiments (ACME) project, a series of independent studies of 
gaseous flames performed in the station’s Combustion Integrated Rack (CIR). 
 
Week of June 1, 2020 
Cleaner, more efficient flames 
During the week, the crew made changes for different runs of the Structure and Response of Spherical 
Diffusion Flames (s-Flame) investigation.  This experiment is part of the Advanced Combustion via 
Microgravity Experiments (ACME) project, a series of independent studies of gaseous flames performed 
in the station’s Combustion Integrated Rack (CIR).  In particular, s-Flame advances prediction of the 
structure and dynamics of soot-free and sooty flames with the goal of improving fuel efficiency and 
reducing pollutants in routine fuel combustion activities on Earth. It also could contribute to better 
spacecraft fire prevention through innovative research focused on materials flammability. 
 
Week of Jun 15, 2020 
Other investigations on which the crew performed work: 
• 
Structure and Response of Spherical Diffusion Flames (s-Flame) studies the structure and 
dynamics of soot-free and sooty flames.  Findings could contribute to development of engines 
with improved efficiency and reduced emissions on Earth.  S-Flame is part of the Advanced 

=== PAGE 91 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
91 
 
Combustion via Microgravity Experiments (ACME) project, a series of independent studies of 
gaseous flames performed in the station’s Combustion Integrated Rack (CIR). 
 
Week of July 6, 2020 
Other investigations on which the crew performed work: 
• 
Structure and Response of Spherical Diffusion Flames (s-Flame) studies the structure and 
dynamics of soot-free and sooty flames.  Findings could contribute to development of engines 
with improved efficiency and reduced emissions on Earth.  S-Flame is part of the Advanced 
Combustion via Microgravity Experiments (ACME) project, a series of independent studies of 
gaseous flames performed in the station’s Combustion Integrated Rack (CIR). 
 
 
 

=== PAGE 92 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
92 
 
Appendix I. Crew Activity per the ISS Daily Summary Report 
The subsequent text was prepared by Dennis Stocker, where the source information is available from 
https://blogs.nasa.gov/stationreport.  Text was added identifying the investigation’s two rounds, but s-
Flame operations listed under the heading “All activities are complete unless otherwise noted” were not 
included in this report.  Some days of crew activity were only listed in that way, so this section does not 
comprehensively documenting crew activity in support of the s-Flame experiment. 
 
s-Flame round 1, featuring nitrogen dilution 
 
2019 July 30: GMT 211 
Combustion Integration Rack (CIR)/ Advanced Combustion via Microgravity Experiments (ACME) 
Manifold Bottle Exchange: The crew replaced the 40% O2 gas bottle with a 30% O2 bottle. They also 
replaced the ethylene fuel bottle with a hydrogen/methane mixture fuel bottle. Telemetry showed a slow 
leak in the hydrogen/methane bottle and teams are discussing a recovery plan. Flame Design part 1 
investigation is complete and preparations are in work for transition to the s-Flame investigation. The 
purpose of s-Flame is to advance our ability to predict the structure and dynamics, including extinction 
and instabilities, of both soot-free and sooty flames. The results may contribute to the development of 
lean-burn engines for improved efficiency and reduced pollutant emissions here on Earth. 
 
2019 July 31: GMT 212 
Combustion Integration Rack (CIR) Manifold Bottle Inspection:  Following yesterday’s discovery of a slow 
leak, the fuel bottle connection was demated, inspected, cleaned, and remated to the CIR manifold.  The 
pressure was subsequently monitored and the leak was reduced, but still present.  The crew then looked 
for the leak source (suspected to be either the quick-disconnect or pressure relief valve) with the 
ultrasonic leak detector but were unable to isolate the source of the leak. The fuel bottle valve was closed 
and teams are discussing a forward plan. This fuel bottle will be used for the upcoming s-Flame 
investigation.  
 
2019 August 13: GMT 225 
Advanced Combustion via Microgravity Experiments (ACME): The crew configured the ACME Chamber 
for s-Flame by partially reinstalling the chamber insert to replace the igniter tip, then reinstalled the 
chamber insert, replaced the fuel controller, and closed the Front End Cap and rack doors. The ACME 
experiment series includes five independent studies of gaseous flames. The primary goals of ACME are to 
improve fuel efficiency and reduce pollutant production in routine fuel combustion activities on Earth.  Its 
secondary goal is to improve spacecraft fire prevention through innovative research focused on materials 
flammability. 
 
2019 September 9: GMT 252 
Combustion Integrated Rack (CIR): The crew replaced the Manifold 4 fuel and Nitrogen bottles in 
preparation for upcoming s-Flames experiment runs. The CIR includes an optics bench, combustion 
chamber, fuel and oxidizer control, and five different cameras for performing combustion experiments in 
microgravity. 
 
2019 September 23: GMT 266 
Combustion Integration Rack (CIR)/ Advanced Combustion via Microgravity Experiments (ACME):  In 
support of the ongoing s-Flame experiment, the crew replaced the fuel and oxidizer manifold bottles as 

=== PAGE 93 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
93 
 
well as the mass flow controller.  The purpose of s-Flame is to advance the ability to predict the structure 
and dynamics, including extinction and instabilities, of both soot-free and sooty flames. Results may 
contribute to the development of lean-burn engines for improved efficiency and reduced pollutant 
emissions here on Earth.  S-Flame is one of five experiments hosted by CIR/ACME, which is designed to 
study gaseous flames. 
 
2019 October 24: GMT 297 
CIR (Combustion Integrated Rack): The crew did a full replacement of the FCF CIR image processor 
(IPSUG) due to a previous failure of the hard drive. The CIR includes an optics bench, combustion chamber, 
fuel and oxidizer control, and five different cameras for performing combustion experiments in 
microgravity. 
 
2019 November 19: GMT 323 
CIR/ACME/s-Flames manifold bottle exchange: As a continuation of the s-Flame experiment, the crew 
performed a routine manifold bottle exchange.  In this activity, the crew replaced a used 30% O2/70% 
N2 bottle with a new one of the same composition, and replaced the used 45% CH4/55% N2 fuel bottle 
with a 100% H2 fuel bottle.  The purpose of s-Flame is to advance our ability to predict the structure and 
dynamics, including extinction and instabilities, of both soot-free and sooty flames. The results may 
contribute to the development of lean-burn engines for improved efficiency and reduced pollutant 
emissions here on Earth.  S-Flame is one of five experiments hosted by CIR/ACME which is designed to 
study gaseous flames. 
 
2019 December 13: GMT 347 
Advanced Combustion via Microgravity Experiments (ACME): The crew replaced the ACME Bypass 
Controller and the ACME Fuel Controller, in order to continue s-flame operations. The ACME experiment 
series being performed in the CIR includes five independent studies of gaseous flames. The primary goals 
of ACME are to improve fuel efficiency and reduce pollutant production in routine fuel combustion 
activities on Earth.  Its secondary goal is to improve spacecraft fire prevention through innovative research 
focused on materials flammability. 
 
2019 December 24: GMT 358 
CIR/ACME (Combustion Integration Rack/Advanced Combustion via Microgravity Experiments): In 
support of the continuing s-Flame investigation, the crew exchanged the ACME Bypass Controller and the 
ACME Fuel Controller.  These controllers allow different flow regimes to be used for the experiment.  The 
purpose of s-Flame is to advance our ability to predict the structure and dynamics, including extinction 
and instabilities, of both soot-free and sooty flames. The results may contribute to the development of 
lean-burn engines for improved efficiency and reduced pollutant emissions here on Earth.  S-Flame is one 
of five experiments hosted by CIR/ACME which is designed to study gaseous flames. 
 
2020 
2020 January 2: GMT 002 
Combustion Integrated Rack (CIR): As a continuation of the s-Flame experiment, the crew performed 
manifold H2 and CH4 bottle exchanges. The CIR includes an optics bench, combustion chamber, fuel and 
oxidizer control, and five different cameras for performing combustion experiments in microgravity. 
 

=== PAGE 94 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
94 
 
2020 January 8: GMT 008 
Combustion Integrated Rack (CIR): As a continuation of the s-Flame experiment, the crew performed a 
manifold H2 and CH4 bottle exchanges. The CIR includes an optics bench, combustion chamber, fuel and 
oxidizer control, and five different cameras for performing combustion experiments in microgravity.  
 
2020 January 17: GMT 017 
CIR/ACME (Combustion Integration Rack/Advanced Combustion via Microgravity Experiments): In 
support of the continuing s-Fames investigation, the crew replaced a used 3.8L Nitrogen/Oxygen manifold 
bottle with a new one.  They also replaced the 1.0L hydrogen/methane manifold fuel bottle with a 100% 
hydrogen fuel bottle.  The purpose of s-Flame is to advance our ability to predict the structure and 
dynamics, including extinction and instabilities, of both soot-free and sooty flames. The results may 
contribute to the development of lean-burn engines for improved efficiency and reduced pollutant 
emissions here on Earth.  S-Flame is one of five experiments hosted by CIR/ACME, which is designed to 
study gaseous flames. 
 
2020 January 28: GMT 028 
CIR (Combustion Integrated Rack): The crew replaced the CIR manifold #4 with new H2 and C2H4/N2 gas 
bottles in preparation of continued s-Flame test runs. The CIR includes an optics bench, combustion 
chamber, fuel and oxidizer control, and five different cameras for performing combustion experiments in 
microgravity. 
 
s-Flame round 2, featuring helium dilution 
 
2020 April 23: GMT 114 
CIR (Combustion Integrated Rack): The crew performed a replacement of the CIR FOMA (Fuel Oxidizer 
Management Assembly) Calibration Unit in preparation for the next set of s-flame runs. The CIR includes 
an optics bench, combustion chamber, fuel and oxidizer control, and five different cameras for performing 
combustion experiments in microgravity. 
 
2020 April 24: GMT 115 
CIR (Combustion Integrated Rack): The crew prepared the CIR to allow ground commanding of the FOMA 
(Fuel Oxidizer Management Assembly) Calibration. The CIR includes an optics bench, combustion 
chamber, fuel and oxidizer control, and five different cameras for performing combustion experiments in 
microgravity. 
 
2020 April 28: GMT 119 
Advanced Combustion via Microgravity Experiments (ACME): The crew replaced an ACME controller In 
preparation for the continuation of s-flame runs. The ACME experiment series being performed in the CIR 
includes five independent studies of gaseous flames. The primary goals of ACME are to improve fuel 
efficiency and reduce pollutant production in routine fuel combustion activities on Earth.  Its secondary 
goal is to improve spacecraft fire prevention through innovative research focused on materials 
flammability. 
 
 
 

=== PAGE 95 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
95 
 
2020 May 1: GMT 122 
Combustion Integrated Rack (CIR): The crew replaced Nitrogen/Oxygen manifold bottles in support of 
the continuing s-Flames investigation. The CIR includes an optics bench, combustion chamber, fuel and 
oxidizer control, and five different cameras for performing combustion experiments in microgravity. 
 
2020 May 13: GMT 134 
Combustion Integration Rack/Advanced Combustion via Microgravity Experiments (CIR/ACME) : As a 
continuation of the ACME/s-Flame part 2 investigation, the crew removed a nitrogen check gas bottle and 
replaced it with a helium check gas bottle.  They also removed a H2/CH4/He fuel bottle and replaced it 
with one of the same gas mixture, but different percent composition.  Following the installation of the gas 
bottles, it was noted the actual pressure in the helium check gas bottle was significantly lower than 
expected and the team is assessing the impacts.  The purpose of s-Flame is to advance our ability to predict 
the structure and dynamics, including extinction and instabilities, of both soot-free and sooty flames. The 
results may contribute to the development of lean-burn engines for improved efficiency and reduced 
pollutant emissions here on Earth.  S-Flame is one of five experiments hosted by CIR/ACME which is 
designed to study gaseous flames. 
 
2020 May 19: GMT 140 
Advanced Combustion via Microgravity Experiments (ACME): The crew replaced Nitrogen/Oxygen 
manifold bottles in support of the continuing s-Flames investigation. The ACME experiment series being 
performed in the CIR includes five independent studies of gaseous flames. The primary goals of ACME are 
to improve fuel efficiency and reduce pollutant production in routine fuel combustion activities on 
Earth.  Its secondary goal is to improve spacecraft fire prevention through innovative research focused on 
materials flammability. 
 
2020 May 26: GMT 147 
Advanced Combustion via Microgravity Experiments (ACME): The crew replaced Nitrogen/Oxygen 
manifold bottles in support of the continuing s-Flames investigation. The ACME experiment series being 
performed in the Combustion Integrated Rack (CIR) includes five independent studies of gaseous flames. 
The primary goals of ACME are to improve fuel efficiency and reduce pollutant production in routine fuel 
combustion activities on Earth.  Its secondary goal is to improve spacecraft fire prevention through 
innovative research focused on materials flammability. 
 
2020 June 2: GMT 154 
Combustion Integration Rack/Advanced Combustion via Microgravity Experiments (CIR/ACME):  In a 
continuation of the s-Flame part 2 investigation, the crew performed the necessary activities to change 
out a mass flow controller and igniter.  The mass flow controller allows the ACME experimenters to study 
combustion under different gas flow regimes.  The igniter was changed from a well-used hoop style igniter 
to a coil style igniter which can deliver more energy to ignite a gas mixture.  A minor leak was seen in one 
of the coolant Quick Disconnect (QD) fittings when it was removed, but this is not expected to be an issue 
once installed again.  The purpose of s-Flame is to advance our ability to predict the structure and 
dynamics, including extinction and instabilities, of both soot-free and sooty flames. The results may 
contribute to the development of lean-burn engines for improved efficiency and reduced pollutant 
emissions here on Earth.  S-Flame is one of five experiments hosted by CIR/ACME which is designed to 
study gaseous flames. 
 

=== PAGE 96 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
96 
 
2020 June 4: GMT 156 
Combustion Integration Rack/Advanced Combustion via Microgravity Experiments (CIR/ACME):  In 
support of the on-going s-Flame part 2 investigation, the crew removed a 45% H2/ 55% He fuel bottle and 
replaced it with a 45% CH4/ 55% He fuel bottle.  The purpose of s-Flame is to advance our ability to predict 
the structure and dynamics, including extinction and instabilities, of both soot-free and sooty flames. The 
results may contribute to the development of lean-burn engines for improved efficiency and reduced 
pollutant emissions here on Earth.  S-Flame is one of five experiments hosted by CIR/ACME which is 
designed to study gaseous flames. 
 
2020 June 10: GMT 162 
Combustion Integration Rack/Advanced Combustion via Microgravity Experiments (CIR/ACME):  In 
support of the on-going s-Flame part 2 investigation, the crew removed a 45% CH4/ 55% He fuel bottle 
and replaced it with a 20% CH2=CH2/ 80% He fuel bottle.  The purpose of s-Flame is to advance our ability 
to predict the structure and dynamics, including extinction and instabilities, of both soot-free and sooty 
flames. The results may contribute to the development of lean-burn engines for improved efficiency and 
reduced pollutant emissions here on Earth.  S-Flame is one of five experiments hosted by CIR/ACME which 
is designed to study gaseous flames. 
 
2020 June 16: GMT 168 
Advanced Combustion via Microgravity Experiments (ACME): In support of the on-going s-Flame part 2 
investigation, the crew replaced C2H4, He, and O2 gas bottles in preparation for upcoming test point runs. 
The ACME experiment series being performed in the CIR includes five independent studies of gaseous 
flames. The primary goals of ACME are to improve fuel efficiency and reduce pollutant production in 
routine fuel combustion activities on Earth.  Its secondary goal is to improve spacecraft fire prevention 
through innovative research focused on materials flammability. 
 
2020 June 19: GMT 171 
Advanced Combustion via Microgravity Experiments (ACME): In support of the on-going s-Flame part 2 
investigation, the crew replaced the C2H4 fuel bottle in preparation for upcoming test point runs. The 
ACME experiment series being performed in the CIR includes five independent studies of gaseous flames. 
The primary goals of ACME are to improve fuel efficiency and reduce pollutant production in routine fuel 
combustion activities on Earth.  Its secondary goal is to improve spacecraft fire prevention through 
innovative research focused on materials flammability. 
 
 

=== PAGE 97 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
97 
 
Appendix J. Crew Activity per the NASA Space Station Blog 
This section consists of excerpts from https://blogs.nasa.gov/spacestation/.  Hyperlinks were generally not 
included, but clarifications have sometimes been added in red. 
 
s-Flame round 1, featuring nitrogen dilution 
 
2019 August 13 – Crew Gets Ready for Next Spacewalk and New Spaceships 
Christina Koch of NASA serviced and replaced hardware that fuels experiments inside the Combustion 
Integrated Rack. 
 
2019 September 23 - Japanese, Russian Rockets Prepare to Launch Cargo and 
Crew This Week 
Luca Parmitano of ESA (European Space Agency) replaced fuel bottles in the Combustion Integrated Rack 
…. 
 
2019 October 24 - Crew Explores Space Biology, Reviews Particle Detector Repairs 
Meir later swapped out a failed computer hard drive that supports combustion experiments. 
 
2019 October 29 - Spacesuits, Human Research, Robotics Training Ahead of Cargo 
Missions 
 
NASA astronaut Jessica Meir works to swap out a failed computer hard drive that supports experiments 
inside the Combustion Integrated Rack aboard the International Space Station’s U.S. Destiny laboratory 
module. 
 
2020 January 8 - Spacewalk Preps Underway Amidst Space Research 
Cosmonauts Alexander Skvortsov and Oleg Skripochka split their time on Russian science and 
maintenance tasks. … Skripochka replaced fuel bottles for combustion research. 
 
2020 January 17 – Nutrition Studies, Spacewalk Preps Ahead of SpaceX Crew 
Escape Test 
Fellow cosmonaut Oleg Skripochka serviced combustion research gear …. 

=== PAGE 98 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
98 
 
s-Flame round 2, featuring helium dilution 
 
2020 April 21 - Advanced Space Research Ahead of Weekend Cargo Mission 
In the afternoon, Cassidy moved over to the U.S. Destiny laboratory module and swapped computer parts 
inside the Fluids and Combustion Facility (FCF). The FCF consists of two refrigerator-sized research racks 
enabling safe observations of the behavior of fluids and flames in microgravity. Scientists use the data to 
design advanced fuel transfer systems and increase fire safety. 
While this may be true, Cassidy did not make such a change on the Combustion Integrated Rack (CIR) 
during April 2020. 
 
2020 April 28 - Cygnus Prepped for Departure During Station Science and Upkeep 
Cassidy also opened up the Combustion Integrated Rack for maintenance replacing components in the 
research device that enables safe fuel, flame and soot studies in microgravity. 
 
2020 April 29 - Spacesuit Work and Heart Research Fill Crew Day 
 
Expedition 63 Commander Chris Cassidy works in the Combustion Integrated Rack, a research device that 
enables safe fuel, flame and soot studies in microgravity. 
While Cassidy had worked on the Combustion Integrated Rack (CIR) on April 28, he is not doing so in this 
photo (in which the CIR facility does not appear) and as such the caption is in error.  In this photo, he 
appears to be working at a Materials Science Research Rack (MSRR). 
 
2020 May 13 - Flying Robots, Ultrasound Eye Scans Top Science Schedule 
Ivanishin started his workday swapping fuel bottles inside the Combustion Integrated Rack which enables 
safe studies of fuels, flames and soot in microgravity. 
 
2020 May 19 - Japan Ready for Cargo Launch, Crew Works Science and Emergency 
Procedures 
Veteran cosmonaut Anatoly Ivanishin continued servicing the Combustion Integrated Rack as he swapped 
out fuel bottles inside the device that enables fuel, flame and soot research in microgravity. 
 
 
 

=== PAGE 99 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
99 
 
2020 May 26 - Expedition 63 Awaits SpaceX Crew, Unpacks Japanese Cargo 
Veteran cosmonaut Anatoly Ivanishin swapped out more fuel bottles inside the Combustion Integrated 
Rack to maintain research operations inside the U.S. Destiny laboratory module. The refrigerator-sized 
research rack enables fuel, flame and soot research in microgravity. 
 
2020 June 4 - Advanced Station Science Benefiting Humans 
Ivanishin was inside the U.S. Destiny laboratory swapping fuel bottles inside the Combustion Integrated 
Rack to enable safe fuel and flame science. 
 
2020 June 10 - Station Buzzing With Science in Middle of Spacewalk 
Preps 
Today, the three NASA astronauts and two Roscosmos cosmonauts juggled a variety of experiments 
encompassing fluids, combustion, genetics and vision among others. … Russian Flight Engineer Anatoly 
Ivanishin … swapped fuel bottles inside the Combustion Integrated Rack to continue safe fuel and flame 
research. 
 
2020 June 16 - Biology and Physics as Crew Enters BEAM, Preps for Spacewalk 
Tuesday’s science aboard the International Space Station encompassed life science, fluids and flames to 
help humans on Earth and in space. … Veteran cosmonaut Anatoly Ivanishin continued to service 
the Combustion Integrated Rack replacing fuel bottles to maintain safe fuel and flame research in the 
device. Insights could improve fire safety as well as combustion processes for Earth and space industries. 
 
2020 June 19 - Crew Readies Satellite and Organizes Station 
Cosmonaut Anatoly Ivanishin changed out fuel bottles in the Combustion Integrated Rack this morning to 
continue the safe research of flames in microgravity. 
 
2020 June 22 – Astronauts Check Spacewalk Tools and Suits, Study Space Physics 
Hurley spent the first half of his Monday working on fluid and combustion physics. He first explored 
how microfluidics can cause biochemical reactions in blood revealing mechanisms hidden on Earth. Next, 
he researched fabricating composite materials to learn how to repair and build structures on future space 
missions. 
While Hurley worked on fluid physics, the reference to combustion is presumably in error.  At the least, he 
did not work on the ACME project on that day, if at all.  
 
2020 July 6 - Cargo and Science Operations Start Work Week 
Cosmonaut Anatoly Ivanishin replaced fuel bottles inside the Combustion Integrated Rack to continue 
safe fuel and flame research. 
 
 
 

=== PAGE 100 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
100 
 
Appendix K. ACME Operations per @ISS_Research on Twitter 
These tweets (from https://twitter.com/ISS_Research/) were from the period of s-Flame operations, i.e., 
from July 2019 to July 2020.  However, please note that some are in regard to other ACME investigations. 
 
2019 Sept. 10: GMT 253 
 
 
2019 Sept. 12: GMT 255 
 
This Flame Design video clip can be viewed at, and downloaded from, https://images.nasa.gov/details-
jsc2019m000710_Designing-Flames-Aboard-ISS-MP4.html. 

=== PAGE 101 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
101 
 
2019 Oct. 18: GMT 291 
 
 
2019 Dec. 28: GMT 362 
 

=== PAGE 102 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
102 
 
2020 Jan. 21: GMT 021 
 
 
2020 April 14: GMT 105 
 

=== PAGE 103 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
103 
 
2020 June 25: GMT 177 
 

=== PAGE 104 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
104 
 
Appendix L. ACME Operations per Astronauts on Twitter 
These tweets are from ISS crew members who conducted operations in support of the s-Flame experiment. 
 
Jessica Meir (@Astro_Jessica) on Twitter, https://twitter.com/astro_jessica  
2019 Nov. 06: GMT 310 
  
 
 
 

=== PAGE 105 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
105 
 
Chris Cassidy (@Astro_SEAL) on Twitter, https://twitter.com/astro_seal 
2020 Sept. 1: GMT 245 
 

=== PAGE 106 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
106 
 
Appendix M. Summary of the ISS data collection 
The s-Flame data is all digital and includes both image and non-image data, where this is true for the other 
ACME experiments.  To be clear, there was no collection of soot or other physical samples that were 
subsequently transported to the ground.  
 
The s-Flame image data includes images from the following cameras: 
1. ACME DataCam, used with a clear fused-silica ‘filter’ and various zoom and focus settings (but 
those settings were consistent within each individual test) 
2. CFI intensified camera, used with CH*, formaldehyde, and UV fused silica filters, but where only 
a single filter was used in each test 
3. Low Light Level Ultraviolet (LLL-UV) camera, equipped with an OH* filter 
4. High-Bitdepth Multispectral (HiBMs) camera, equipped with a red filter corresponding to the 
opposing CIR illumination package, which was sometimes left off 
The raw DataCam images are in a Halcon Iconic Object (hobj) format, while the images from the CFI, 
HiBMs, and LLL-UV cameras are provided in a Tagged Image File (tif) format.  In contrast, the analog video 
was recorded on the ground in a Transport Stream (ts) format. 
 
The key non-imaging data from a test is a comma-delimited file that is described in detail in the Software 
Interface Design Description (ACME-DOC-010 Rev. D). 
 
The raw data is currently archived at NASA and work is underway to make it available publicly through 
NASA’s Physical Science Informatics System (PSI). 
 
 
 

=== PAGE 107 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
107 
 
Appendix N. Publications, presentations, awards, and outreach 
Papers, etc. listed in italics are general to ACME rather than specific to the s-Flame experiment.  
 
N.1 Publications and Presentations with ISS Results 
Conference Proceedings, Presentations, and Posters 
1. 
“Investigations at ISS on Combustion of Gas Mixtures. Sample Results and Technical 
Experience,” Sergey Pichugin, Oleg Artemiev, Sergey Prokopiev, Oleg Kononenko, Oleg 
Novitsky, and Sergey Frolov, XIII International Scientific and Practical Conference ‘Manned 
Flights in Space,’ Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Centre, Star City, Russia, Nov. 13-15, 2019. 
2. 
“Dynamics of Burner-Generated Spherical Diffusion Flames in Microgravity,” Stephen Tse, 
Jonathan Shi, Delin Zhu, and Chung K. Law, 35th Annual Meeting of the American Society 
for Gravitational and Space Research, Denver, Colorado, November 20-23, 2019. 
3. 
“ISS Experiments of Gaseous Spherical Diffusion Flames,” Jonathan Shi, Stephen D. Tse, 
Dennis Stocker, and Chung K. Law, 36th Annual Meeting of the American Society for 
Gravitational and Space Research, Nov. 5-6, 2020. 
4. 
“Flames Investigations at ISS,” Cosmonautics of XXI Century Conference, TSNIIMash, 
Moscow, Russia, S. Pichugin, D. Samsonov, S. Frolov, O. Korobeinichev, and A. Shmakov, May 
12-14, 2021. 
5. 
“Advanced Combustion via Microgravity Experiments on the International Space Station,” 
Dennis P. Stocker, Work in Progress Poster, 12th U.S. National Combustion Meeting, May 24-
26, 2021. 
 
N.2 Publications and Presentations (comprehensive list) 
Papers, etc. in this section which include ISS results are enclosed in borders like this. 
Peer-Reviewed Journal Papers 
1. 
“Opportunities and challenges of combustion in microgravity,” by C. K. Law and G. M. Faeth, 
Progress in Energy and Combustion Science, Vol. 20, pp. 65-113 (1994). 
https://doi.org/10.1016/0360-1285(94)90006-X 
2. 
“On burner-stabilized cylindrical premixed flames in microgravity,” by J. A. Eng, C. K. Law, 
and D. L. Zhu, Twenty-Fifth Symposium (International) on Combustion, The Combustion 
Institute, Pittsburgh, PA, pp. 1711-1718 (1994). 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0082-0784(06)80819-2 
3. 
“On the structure, stabilization, and dual response of flat-burner flames,” by J. A. Eng, D. L. 
Zhu, and C. K. Law, Combustion and Flame, Vol. 100, pp. 645-652 (1995). 
https://doi.org/10.1016/0010-2180(94)00102-X 
4. 
“Extinction mechanisms of near-limit premixed flames and extended limits of flammability,” 
by C. J. Sung and C. K. Law, Twenty-Sixth Symposium (International) on Combustion, The 
Combustion Institute, Pittsburgh, PA, pp. 865-873 (1996). 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0082-0784(96)80296-7 
5. 
“On the spreading of unsteady cylindrical diffusion flames,” by J. Qian and C. K. Law, 
Combustion and Flame, Vol. 110, pp. 152-162 (1997). 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0010-2180(97)00069-2 
6. 
“On the response of spherical premixed flames under rotation,” by J. Qian, J. K. Bechtold, 
and C. K. Law, Combustion and Flame, Vol. 110, pp. 78-91 (1997). 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0010-2180(97)00051-5 

=== PAGE 108 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
108 
 
7. 
“Role of flamefront motion and criterion for global quasi-steadiness in droplet burning,” by 
L. He, S. D. Tse, and C. K. Law, Twenty-Seventh Symposium (International) on Combustion, 
The 
Combustion 
Institute, 
Pittsburgh, 
PA, 
pp. 
1943-1950 
(1998).  
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0082-0784(98)80038-6 
8. 
“On micro-buoyancy spherical diffusion flames and a double luminous zone structure of the 
hydrogen/methane flame,” by C. J. Sung, D. L. Zhu, and C. K. Law, Twenty-Seventh 
Symposium (International) on Combustion, The Combustion Institute, Pittsburgh, PA, pp. 
2559-2567 (1998).  https://doi.org/10.1016/S0082-0784(98)80108-2 
9. 
“Structure, aerodynamics, and geometry of premixed flamelets,” by C.K. Law and C.J. Sung, 
Progress in Energy and Combustion Science, Vol. 26, pp. 459-505 (2000). 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0360-1285(00)00018-6 
10. 
“Microgravity burner-generated spherical diffusion flames: experiment and computation,” 
by S. D. Tse, D. L. Zhu, L. He, C. J. Sung, and C. K. Law, Combustion and Flame, Vol. 125, pp. 
1265-1278 (2001).  https://doi.org/10.1016/S0010-2180(01)00247-4 
11. 
“Chemiluminescent OH* and CH* flame structure and aerodynamic scaling of weakly 
buoyant, nearly spherical diffusion flames,” by S. W. Yoo, C. K. Law and S. D. Tse, 
Proceedings of the Combustion Institute, Vol. 29, pp. 1663-1670 (2002). 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S1540-7489(02)80204-8 
12. 
“Oscillatory extinction of spherical diffusion flames: micro-buoyancy experiment and 
computation,” by S. W. Yoo, E. W. Christiansen, and C. K. Law, Proceedings of the 
Combustion Institute, Vol. 29, pp. 29-36 (2002).  https://doi.org/10.1016/S1540-
7489(02)80008-6 
13. 
“A computational study of oscillatory extinction of spherical diffusion flames,” by E. W. 
Christiansen, S. D. Tse, and C. K. Law, Combustion and Flame, Vol. 134, pp. 327-337 (2003).  
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0010-2180(03)00112-3 
14. 
“Development of comprehensive detailed and reduced reaction mechanisms for 
combustion modeling,” by C. K. Law, C. J. Sung, H. Wang, and T. F. Lu, AIAA Journal, Vol. 41, 
No. 9, pp. 1629-1646 (2003).  https://doi.org/10.2514/2.7289 
15. 
“Response of spherical diffusion flames under rotation with general Lewis number,” by S. 
W. Yoo, J. Qian, J. K. Bechtold, and C. K. Law, Combustion Theory and Modeling, Vol. 9, pp. 
199-217 (2005).  https://doi.org/10.1080/13647830500098423 
16. 
“Porous spherical burner for combustion experimentation,” by S. W. Yoo, D. L. Zhu, and C. 
K. Law, Review of Scientific Instruments, Vol. 77, No. 7, Art. No. 075102 (2006).  
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.2212399 
17. 
“On intrinsic oscillation in radiation-affected diffusion flames,” by H. Y. Wang and C. K. Law, 
Proceedings of the Combustion Institute, Vol. 31, pp. 979-987 (2007). 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2006.07.183 
18. 
“Effects of variable density on response of spherical diffusion flames under rotation,” by S. 
W. Yoo and C. K. Law, International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer, Vol. 50, pp. 2924-
2935 (2007). 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2006.12.014 
19. 
A mechanistic study of Soret diffusion in hydrogen–air flames,” by F. Yang, C.K. Law, C.J. 
Sung and H.Q. Zhang, Combustion and Flame, Vol. 157, pp. 192-200 (2010). 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2009.09.018 
20. 
“Theory of self-similar accelerative propagation of expanding wrinkled flames and explosion 
triggering,” by V. Akkerman, C. K. Law, and V. Bychkov, Physical Review E, Vol. 83, 026305 
(2011).  https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevE.83.026305 

=== PAGE 109 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
109 
 
21. 
“Response 
of 
spherical 
diffusion 
flames 
subjected to 
rotation: microgravity 
experimentation and computational simulation,” by S. W. Yoo, S. Chaudhuri, K. R. 
Sacksteder, P. Zhang, D. L. Zhu and C. K. Law, Combustion and Flame, Vol. 159, pp. 665-672 
(2012).  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2011.07.013 
22. 
“Fuel options for next generation chemical propulsion,” by C. K. Law, AIAA Journal, Vol. 50, 
No. 1, pp. 19-36 (2012).  https://arc.aiaa.org/doi/pdf/10.2514/1.J051328 
23. 
“A mechanistic evaluation of Soret diffusion in heptane/air flames,” by Y. X. Xin, C. J. Sung 
and C. K. Law, Combustion and Flame, Vol. 159, pp. 2345-2351 (2012). 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2012.03.005 
24. 
“An experimental investigation of self-acceleration of cellular spherical flames,” by F. Wu, 
G. Jomaas, and C. K. Law, Proceedings of the Combustion Institute, Vol. 34, pp. 937-945 
(2013).  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2012.05.068 
25. 
“Initiation and propagation of laminar premixed cool flames,” by Peng Zhao, Wenkai Liang, 
Sili Deng and Chung K. Law, Fuel, Vol. 166, pp. 477-487 (2016). 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2015.11.025 
26. 
“On Colliding Spherical Flames: Morphology, Corner Dynamics, and Flame-generated 
Vorticity,” Sheng Yang, Delin Zhu, and Chung K. Law, Combustion and Flame, Vol. 167, pp. 
444-451 (2016). 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2015.10.029 
27. 
“Extended flammability limits of n-heptane/air mixtures with cool flames,” Wenkai Liang 
and Chung K. Law, Combustion and Flame, Vol. 185, pp. 75-81 (2017). 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2017.06.015 
28. 
“Theory of first-stage ignition delay in hydrocarbon NTC chemistry,” by Wenkai Liang and 
Chung K. Law, Combustion and Flame, Vol. 188, pp. 162-169 (2018). 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2017.10.003 
29. 
“Direct numerical simulation of turbulent nonpremixed "cool" flames: applicability of 
flamelet models,” by Alex G. Novoselov, Chung K. Law and Michael E. Mueller, Proceedings 
of the Combustion Institute, Vol. 27, pp. 2143-2150 (2019). 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2018.06.191 
30. 
“On radical-induced ignition in combustion systems,” by Wenkai Liang and Chung K. Law, 
Annu. Rev. Chem. Biomol. Eng., Vol. 10, pp. 199-217 (2019). 
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-chembioeng-060718-030141 
31. 
“Binary collision of a burning droplet and a non-burning droplet of xylene: Outcome regimes 
and flame dynamics,” G. Xiong, R. Gandhi, X. Zhong, L. Mädler, S.D. Tse, Proceedings of the 
Combustion Institute 37, 3345–3352 (2019). 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2018.06.198 
 
Conference Proceedings, Presentations, and Posters 
32. 
"Stabilization mechanisms and burning rates of cylindrical burner flames," by J. A. Eng, C. K. 
law, and D. L. Zhu, AIAA Paper No. 94-0571, 32nd Aerospace Sciences Meeting, Reno, NV, 
Jan. 10-13, 1994.  https://arc.aiaa.org/doi/pdf/10.2514/6.1994-571 
33. 
"On burner-stabilized cylindrical premixed flames in microgravity," by J. A. Eng, D. Zhu and 
C. K. Law, Third International Microgravity Combustion Conference, NASA-Lewis, Cleveland, 
Ohio, April 11-13, 1995. 
https://ntrs.nasa.gov/citations/19960008450 
34. 
"On the response of spherical premixed flames under rotation," by J. Qian, J. K. Bechtold, 
and C. K. Law, Paper No. 61, Technical Meeting of the Eastern States Section of the 
Combustion Institute, Worcester, MA, Oct. 16-18, 1995. 

=== PAGE 110 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
110 
 
35. 
"Studies in flame structure in microgravity," by C. K. Law, C. J. Sung, and D. L. Zhu, 
International Microgravity Combustion Workshop, NASA-Lewis, Cleveland, OH, May 19-21, 
1997. 
36. 
"On burner-supported, spherical diffusion flames under micro-buoyancy conditions," by C. 
J. Sung, D. L. Zhu, S. D. Tse, and C. K. Law, AIAA Paper No. 98-0563, 36th Aerospace Sciences 
Meeting, Reno, NV, January 12-15, 1998. 
https://arc.aiaa.org/doi/pdf/10.2514/6.1998-563 
37. 
"Microgravity burner-generated spherical diffusion flames: experiment and computation," 
by S. D. Tse, D. L. Zhu, C. J. Sung, and C. K. Law, AIAA Paper No. 99-0585, 37th Aerospace 
Sciences Meeting, Reno, NV, January 11-14, 1999. 
https://arc.aiaa.org/doi/pdf/10.2514/6.1999-585 
38. 
"Structure and transient response of spherical flames," by C. K. Law, S. D. Tse, L. He, D. L. 
Zhu, and C. J. Sung, Proc. of Fifth International Microgravity Combustion Workshop, 
Cleveland, OH, pp. 73-76, May 1999. 
39. 
"A computational study on oscillatory extinction of spherical diffusion flames," by E. W. 
Christiansen, S. D. Tse, and C. K. Law, AIAA Paper No. 2001-1084, 39th Aerospace Sciences 
Meeting, Reno, NV, January 8-11, 2001. 
https://arc.aiaa.org/doi/pdf/10.2514/6.2001-1084 
40. 
"Structure and stability of micro-buoyant spherical diffusion flames," by C. K. Law, W. S. 
Yoo, E. W. Christiansen, and S. D. Tse, Paper No. 651, Sixth International Microgravity 
Combustion Workshop, Cleveland, OH, May 22-24, 2001. 
41. 
"Structure and scaling of weakly-buoyant, nearly-spherical diffusion flames," by W. S. Yoo, 
S. D. Tse, and C. K. Law, Paper No. A063, the Third Asia-Pacific Conference on Combustion, 
Seoul, Korea, June 24-27, 2001. 
42. 
"Oscillatory extinction of spherical diffusion flames," by C. K. Law, S. W. Yoo, and E. W. 
Christiansen, Paper No. 62, 7th International Workshop on Microgravity Combustion and 
Chemically Reacting Flows, Cleveland, OH, June 3-6, 2003. 
https://ntrs.nasa.gov/citations/20040053573 
43. 
"Response of rotating diffusion flames with general Lewis numbers," by S. W. Yoo, J. Qian, 
J. K. Bechtold, and C. K. Law, Paper No. 04S-18, Spring Technical Meeting of the Western 
States Section of the Combustion Institute, the Combustion Institute, Davis, CA, March 29-
30, 2004. 
44. 
Chen, S., and Tse*, S.D., “Thin-Flame Theory for Droplet Combustion at Low Grashof 
Numbers,” AIAA 2005-1140, 43rd Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, AIAA, Jan. 10-
13, 2005, Reno, NV.  https://arc.aiaa.org/doi/pdf/10.2514/6.2005-1140 
45. 
"Nonlinear analysis of pulsating instabilities in diffusion flame," by H. Y. Wang, J. K. Bechtold, 
and C. K. Law, Paper No. AIAA 2005-0544, 43rd Aerospace Sciences Meeting, Reno, NV, Jan. 
10-13, 2005.  https://arc.aiaa.org/doi/pdf/10.2514/6.2005-544 
46. 
"An experimental study on the response of spherical diffusion flames subjected to rotation 
and nonequidiffusion," by S. Yoo, D. L. Zhu, C. K. Law, and K. Sacksteder, Paper No. AIAA 
2005-1141, 43rd Aerospace Sciences Meeting, Reno, NV, Jan. 10-13, 2005.  
https://arc.aiaa.org/doi/pdf/10.2514/6.2005-1141 
47. 
"Forced oscillation in diffusion flames near resonance," H. Y. Wang, J. K. Bechtold, and C. K. 
Law, Paper No. F26, 4th Joint Meeting of the US Sections of the Combustion Institute, 
Philadelphia, Pa, March 20-23, 2005. 
48. 
“Combustion Research on the International Space Station,” T.F. O'Malley, W.A. Sheredy, and 
D.P. Stocker, 59th International Astronautical Congress 2008, Vol. 2, pp. 756-766 (2008). 

=== PAGE 111 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
111 
 
49. 
“A mechanistic study of Soret diffusion in hydrogen–air flames,” by F. Yang, C.K. Law, C.J. 
Sung, and H.Q. Zhang, Paper No. AIAA-2009-0988, 47th Aerospace Sciences Meeting, 
Orlando, FL, Jan. 5-8, 2009. 
50. 
“Response 
of 
spherical 
diffusion 
flames 
subjected to 
rotation: microgravity 
experimentation and computational simulation,” S. W. Yoo, S. Chaudhuri, P. Zhang, D. L. 
Zhu and C. K. Law, Paper No. 1E15, 7th US National Combustion Meeting, Georgia Institute 
of Technology, Atlanta, GA, March 20-23, 2011. 
51. 
“Soret diffusion in n-heptane/air flames,” by Y.X. Xin, C.J. Sung and C.K. Law, Paper No. 
1E18, 7th US National Combustion Meeting, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, 
March 20-23, 2011. 
52. 
“A comprehensive evaluation of Soret diffusion in heptane-air flames,” Y. X. Xin, C. J. Sung, 
and C. K. Law, Paper No. B-28, Fall Technical Meeting of the Eastern States Section of the 
Combustion Institute, University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT, Oct 9-12, 2011. 
53. 
“Dynamics and morphology of spherical diffusion flames under rotation,” S. W. Yoo, S. 
Chaudhuri, K. R. Sacksteder, P. Zhang, D. L. Zhu, C. K. Law, Paper No. 2012-1251, Aerospace 
Sciences Meeting, Nashville, TN, Jan. 8-12, 2012. 
https://arc.aiaa.org/doi/pdf/10.2514/6.2012-1251 
54. 
“Gaseous Laminar Diffusion Flames for the Combustion Integrated Rack,” D.P. Stocker, F. 
Takahashi, P.V. Ferkul, and J.M. Hickman, 28th Annual Meeting of the American Society for 
Gravitational and Space Research, New Orleans, LA, Nov. 28 to Dec. 2, 2012. 
55. 
“Dynamics and morphology of colliding spherical flames,” Sheng Yang, Swetaprovo 
Chaudhuri, Delin Zhu and Chung K. Law, Fall Technical Meeting of the Eastern States Section 
of the Combustion Institute, Clemson, SC, Oct 13-16, 2013. 
56. 
“Burner-Stabilized Gaseous Flames for the Combustion Integrated Rack,” D.P. Stocker, F. 
Takahashi, and J.M. Hickman, 29th Annual Meeting of the American Society for 
Gravitational and Space Research and 5th International Symposium for Physical Sciences in 
Space, Orlando, FL, Nov. 3-8, 2013. 
57. 
“Gaseous Non-Premixed Flame Research Planned for the International Space Station,” D.P. 
Stocker, F. Takahashi, J.M. Hickman, and A.C. Suttles, Spring Technical Meeting of the 
Central States Section of the Combustion Institute, Tulsa, OK, March 16–18, 2014. 
58. 
“Advanced Combustion via Microgravity Experiments: Planned International Space Station 
Research on Gaseous Flames,” D.P. Stocker, F. Takahashi, J.M. Hickman, and A.C. Suttles, 
Work in Progress Poster, 35th International Symposium on Combustion, San Francisco, CA, 
Aug. 3-8, 2014. 
59. 
“Computational Simulation of Spherical Diffusion Flame Dynamics and Extinction in 
Microgravity,” by T. Xia, G. Xiong, S.D. Tse and C.K. Law, 2014 Annual Meeting of the 
American Society for Gravitational and Space Research, Oct, 22-26, 2014, Pasadena, CA. 
60. 
“Dynamics of colliding flames,” by Sheng Yang, Delin Zhu and Chung K. Law, Annual Meeting 
of the American Society for Gravitational and Space Research, Pasadena, CA, Oct. 22-26, 
2014. 
61. 
“On premixed cool flames in the counterflow,” P. Zhao, W. Liang, S. Deng, and C.K. Law, 
Paper No. 3E01, 9th US National Combustion Meeting, Cincinnati, OH, May 18-20, 2015. 
62. 
“Ignition and propagation of laminar premixed cool flames,” by W. Liang, P. Zhao and C.K. 
Law, 31st Annual Meeting of the American Society for Gravitational and Space Research, 
Alexandria, Virginia, November 11-14, 2015. 
 
 

=== PAGE 112 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
112 
 
63. 
“Investigations at ISS on Combustion of Gas Mixtures. Sample Results and Technical 
Experience,” Sergey Pichugin, Oleg Artemiev, Sergey Prokopiev, Oleg Kononenko, Oleg 
Novitsky, and Sergey Frolov, XIII International Scientific and Practical Conference ‘Manned 
Flights in Space,’ Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Centre, Star City, Russia, Nov. 13-15, 2019. 
64. 
“Dynamics of Burner-Generated Spherical Diffusion Flames in Microgravity,” Stephen Tse, 
Jonathan Shi, Delin Zhu, and Chung K. Law, 35th Annual Meeting of the American Society 
for Gravitational and Space Research, Denver, Colorado, November 20-23, 2019. 
65. 
“ISS Experiments of Gaseous Spherical Diffusion Flames,” Jonathan Shi, Stephen D. Tse, 
Dennis Stocker, and Chung K. Law, 36th Annual Meeting of the American Society for 
Gravitational and Space Research, Nov. 5-6, 2020. 
66. 
“Flames Investigations at ISS,” Cosmonautics of XXI Century Conference, TSNIIMash, 
Moscow, Russia, S. Pichugin, D. Samsonov, S. Frolov, O. Korobeinichev, and A. Shmakov, May 
12-14, 2021. 
67. 
“Advanced Combustion via Microgravity Experiments on the International Space Station,” 
Dennis P. Stocker, Work in Progress Poster, 12th U.S. National Combustion Meeting, May 24-
26, 2021. 
 
Theses and Dissertations 
1. 
S. W. Yoo, PhD ’06, "On the structure and dynamics of stationary and rotating spherical 
diffusion flames," Staff researcher, GE Aviation, Cincinnati. 
https://www.proquest.com/docview/305279679 
2. 
Laurel Paxton, BSE ’14, Undergraduate Thesis, “Weakly Buoyant Spherical Diffusion Flames: 
Properties of Hydrogen-CO/Ethylene Flames,” Princeton University, Princeton, NJ. 
http://arks.princeton.edu/ark:/88435/dsp014f16c301w 
3. 
Tianying Xia, M.S. Thesis, “Computational Simulation of Spherical Diffusion Flame Dynamics 
and Extinction in Microgravity,” Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ, 1/5/2015. 
https://doi.org/doi:10.7282/T3QC057M 
 
 
 

=== PAGE 113 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
113 
 
N.3 Awards 
1. First Place, Combustion Art Competition, “Three Faces of An Expanding Flame,” Chung K. 
Law, Swetaprovo Chaudhuri, and Fujia Wu, 8th U.S. National Combustion Meeting, Park City, 
Utah, May 19-22, 2013. 
 
The three images are snap 
shots 
of 
a 
spark-ignited 
expanding flame in different 
environments of the same 
hydrogen-air mixture. The top 
flame 
shows 
the 
ideal, 
reference case of a stable, 
smooth flame surface in a 
quiescent 
environment 
at 
atmospheric 
pressure. 
The 
middle flame is taken under 
elevated pressure simulating 
that 
within 
an 
internal 
combustion engine. The flame 
surface is hydrodynamically 
unstable and develops cells, 
causing the flame to burn faster 
due to the increased flame 
surface area. The bottom flame 
is taken in a highly turbulent 
environment which simulates 
another aspect of the engine 
interior. Now the flame surface 
is distorted by the multi-scale 
turbulence, which again leads 
to an increase of the burning 
rate. 
 
2. Morgan McKinzie Senior Thesis Prize (for excellence in undergraduate research), “Weakly buoyant 
spherical diffusion flames: properties of hydrogen-CO/ethylene flames,” Laurel Paxton, Dept. of 
Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, Princeton University, June 2014. 
 
N.4 Outreach 
NASA 
Project 
Scientists 
Dennis 
Stocker 
created 
the 
Space 
Flames 
Facebook 
page 
(www.facebook.com/space.flames) and Flickr site (https://www.flickr.com/photos/space-flames), 
where some entries are specific to s-Flame.  He continues to administer these sites, where most 
content has been about the ACME project of which s-Flame is a part.  Meanwhile, Stocker has made 
educational and general information is available via https://tinyurl.com/space-flames.  As an 
educational example, a simple board game related to the ACME’s spherical flames experiments, such 
as s-Flame, which can be downloaded.  As another example, an ACME information sheet providing an 
overview and recent status can also be downloaded through that site.  Such flyers have been 
distributed at meetings of The Combustion Institute and the American Society for Gravitational and 

=== PAGE 114 ===
ACME/s-Flame Final Report (2021) 
 
29 July 2021 
114 
 
Space Research (ASGSR).  Other downloads, such as the s-Flame Science Requirements Document, 
are available through https://www1.grc.nasa.gov/space/iss-research/iss-fcf/cir/acme/downloads/. 
 
Both Princeton and Rutgers have promoted awareness of the s-Flame investigation online, for 
example, through Rutgers’ 2019 article, “From the Ground Up: Conducting International Space Station 
Experiments from a Rutgers Office.” 
 
Meanwhile, NASA promoted awareness of ISS combustion research with the video ‘The Power of 
Studying Combustion on the ISS’ which was posted on March 13, 2018. 
 
Awareness of ISS combustion research, including the ACME project, was promoted on Oct. 15, 2018 
by The Combustion Institute in their online news article, “International Space Station (ISS) Combustion 
Experiments.” 
 
Stocker is involved in a broad range of NASA educational outreach to students and teachers, Scouts 
of both genders, and the general public.   His primary outreach focus is the fundamentals of 
microgravity (for which resources are available via  http://tinyurl.com/SEECmicrogravity) and human 
spaceflight.  But he periodically addresses other topics, e.g., where he sometimes speaks on ‘NASA 
and the Science of Superman’ – for example at the Superman Celebration in Metropolis, IL.  In this 
regard, his NASA outreach is carried out locally, regionally, nationally, and online.  For example, he 
regularly presents on microgravity at  Space Center Houston’s Space Exploration Educators 
Conference (SEEC).   He has exhibited the last five National Scout Jamborees, four national Boy Scout 
conferences, the last three national Girl Scout conventions, and the 2019 World Scout Jamboree 
(which was held in the U.S.).  Stocker has been a key lead for the agency in NASA’s participation in 
these Scouting events, where as an example the latter outreach is visually described at 
www.nasa.gov/feature/stem/world-scout-jamboree.html. 
