
=== PAGE 1 ===
20 August 2018 
 
 
Advanced Combustion via Microgravity Experiments (ACME) 
 
PURPOSE:  ACME is focused on advanced combustion 
technology via fundamental microgravity research.  The 
primary goal is to improve efficiency and reduce pollutant 
emission in practical terrestrial combustion.  A secondary 
objective is fire prevention, especially for spacecraft. 
 
RESEARCH:  ACME includes six independent experiments 
investigating laminar, non-premixed flames of gaseous fuels.  
The experiments are being conducted with a single set of 
modular hardware in the Combustion Integrated Rack (CIR) 
on the International Space Station (ISS).  While the ISS 
astronauts set up the experimental hardware, the ACME tests 
are remotely commanded from NASA’s Glenn ISS Payload 
Operations Center. 
STATUS:  ACME setup and checkout were carried out by the 
ISS crew in Sept.-Oct. 2017.  Thus far, a dozen astronauts 
from Germany, Italy, Japan, Russia and the United States 
have supported the ACME research.  Since November 2017, 
over 300 flames have been ignited for the Coflow Laminar 
Diffusion Flame (CLD Flame) and Electric-Field Effects on 
Laminar Diffusion Flames (E-FIELD Flames) experiments led 
respectively by Profs. Marshall B. Long (Yale University) and 
Derek Dunn-Rankin (University of California, Irvine).   
 
A second round of CLD Flame tests is currently underway and 
should end in September when the testing will transition 
back to the E-FIELD Flames experiment.  In late 2018, the 
hardware will be reconfigured for the Burning Rate Emulator 
(BRE) experiment led by Prof. Jim Quintiere (University of 
Maryland).  While the first two ACME experiments are 
focused on improving practical combustion on Earth, BRE is 
aimed at improving spacecraft fire safety. 
Italian astronaut Paolo Nespoli installing the ACME 
chamber insert into the CIR’s combustion chamber. 
U.S. astronaut Joe Acaba aligning the retracting hot-wire 
igniter to the burner on the ACME chamber insert. 
Example image of a lifted coflow flame from the CLD Flame 
experiment led by Prof. Marshall B. Long (Yale University). 
German astronaut Alex Gerst exchanging a mass flow 
controller (for the nitrogen used to dilute the gaseous fuel) 
on the ACME chamber insert. 

=== PAGE 2 ===
20 August 2018 
 
 
Advanced Combustion via Microgravity Experiments (ACME) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
WEB SITE:  http://spaceflightsystems.grc.nasa.gov/acme/ 
UPDATES:  www.facebook.com/space.flames  
PHOTOGRAPHS:  www.flickr.com/photos/space-flames 
EDUCATION:  https://tinyurl.com/space-flames  
Russian cosmonauts Anton Shkaplerov (left) and Oleg 
Artemyev exchanging a CIR gas bottle. 
U.S. astronaut Ricky Arnold cleaning soot from the coflow 
burner used by both the CLD Flame and E-FIELD Flames 
experiments.  The cleaning was carried out with a 
toothbrush, piece of insulated wire, vacuum sweeper, 
flashlight (for burner inspection), dust mask, and gloves. 
 
CONTACT: 
Dennis Stocker, ACME Project Scientist 
NASA Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, OH 
216-433-2166, dennis.p.stocker@nasa.gov 
Lifted flames (detached from the burner) as a function of the 
matched fuel and air velocity from the CLD Flame experiment.  
The false color indicates the CH* concentration as function of 
the radius and height above the burner.  CH* is an excited 
species and emits blue light as it drops to a lower energy level in 
a process known as chemiluminescence.  It is the primary source 
of the blue that is the natural color of hydrocarbon flames 
(neglecting the broadband thermal radiation from the soot). 
Diffusion flames with a weak air coflow as a function of the electric field strength, where an open copper mesh above the flame is 
negatively and positively charged in the top and bottom rows, respectively.  Flames naturally include ions which can be affected 
by a powerful electric or magnetic field.  In ACME’s E-FIELD Flames experiment, the copper mesh is energized up to 10,000 volts.  
This technology could be used to stabilize fuel-lean flames under conditions which are less polluting. 
